Project Gutenberg’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland

Author: Lewis Carroll

Posting Date: June 25, 2008 [EBook #11]
Release Date: March, 1994
Last Updated: October 6, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALICE’S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND ***










ALICE’S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND

Lewis Carroll

THE MILLENNIUM FULCRUM EDITION 3.0




CHAPTER I. Down the Rabbit-Hole

Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the
bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into the
book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in
it, ‘and what is the use of a book,’ thought Alice ‘without pictures or
conversations?’

So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the
hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure
of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and
picking the daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran
close by her.

There was nothing so VERY remarkable in that; nor did Alice think it so
VERY much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself, ‘Oh dear!
Oh dear! I shall be late!’ (when she thought it over afterwards, it
occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the time
it all seemed quite natural); but when the Rabbit actually TOOK A WATCH
OUT OF ITS WAISTCOAT-POCKET, and looked at it, and then hurried on,
Alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had
never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch
to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the field
after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a large
rabbit-hole under the hedge.

In another moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how
in the world she was to get out again.

The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then
dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think
about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very deep
well.

Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had
plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what was
going to happen next. First, she tried to look down and make out what
she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then she
looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with
cupboards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and pictures
hung upon pegs. She took down a jar from one of the shelves as
she passed; it was labelled ‘ORANGE MARMALADE’, but to her great
disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear
of killing somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as
she fell past it.

‘Well!’ thought Alice to herself, ‘after such a fall as this, I shall
think nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave they’ll all think me at
home! Why, I wouldn’t say anything about it, even if I fell off the top
of the house!’ (Which was very likely true.)

Down, down, down. Would the fall NEVER come to an end! ‘I wonder how
many miles I’ve fallen by this time?’ she said aloud. ‘I must be getting
somewhere near the centre of the earth. Let me see: that would be four
thousand miles down, I think--’ (for, you see, Alice had learnt several
things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and though this
was not a VERY good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there
was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over)
‘--yes, that’s about the right distance--but then I wonder what Latitude
or Longitude I’ve got to?’ (Alice had no idea what Latitude was, or
Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to say.)

Presently she began again. ‘I wonder if I shall fall right THROUGH the
earth! How funny it’ll seem to come out among the people that walk with
their heads downward! The Antipathies, I think--’ (she was rather glad
there WAS no one listening, this time, as it didn’t sound at all the
right word) ‘--but I shall have to ask them what the name of the country
is, you know. Please, Ma’am, is this New Zealand or Australia?’ (and
she tried to curtsey as she spoke--fancy CURTSEYING as you’re falling
through the air! Do you think you could manage it?) ‘And what an
ignorant little girl she’ll think me for asking! No, it’ll never do to
ask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere.’

Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began
talking again. ‘Dinah’ll miss me very much to-night, I should think!’
(Dinah was the cat.) ‘I hope they’ll remember her saucer of milk at
tea-time. Dinah my dear! I wish you were down here with me! There are no
mice in the air, I’m afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that’s very
like a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder?’ And here Alice
began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy
sort of way, ‘Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?’ and sometimes, ‘Do
bats eat cats?’ for, you see, as she couldn’t answer either question,
it didn’t much matter which way she put it. She felt that she was dozing
off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand with
Dinah, and saying to her very earnestly, ‘Now, Dinah, tell me the truth:
did you ever eat a bat?’ when suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon
a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment:
she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another
long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it.
There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind, and
was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, ‘Oh my ears
and whiskers, how late it’s getting!’ She was close behind it when she
turned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found
herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging
from the roof.

There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when
Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every
door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to
get out again.

Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid
glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and Alice’s
first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall;
but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small,
but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second
time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and
behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the
little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not
much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passage
into the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get out of
that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and
those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through the
doorway; ‘and even if my head would go through,’ thought poor Alice, ‘it
would be of very little use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could
shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only knew how to begin.’
For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately,
that Alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really
impossible.

There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went
back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at
any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this
time she found a little bottle on it, [‘which certainly was not here
before,’ said Alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper
label, with the words ‘DRINK ME’ beautifully printed on it in large
letters.

It was all very well to say ‘Drink me,’ but the wise little Alice was
not going to do THAT in a hurry. ‘No, I’ll look first,’ she said, ‘and
see whether it’s marked “poison” or not’; for she had read several nice
little histories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild
beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they WOULD not remember
the simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a red-hot
poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your
finger VERY deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had never
forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked ‘poison,’ it is
almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.

However, this bottle was NOT marked ‘poison,’ so Alice ventured to taste
it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavour
of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffee, and hot
buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘What a curious feeling!’ said Alice; ‘I must be shutting up like a
telescope.’

And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face
brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going
through the little door into that lovely garden. First, however, she
waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further:
she felt a little nervous about this; ‘for it might end, you know,’ said
Alice to herself, ‘in my going out altogether, like a candle. I wonder
what I should be like then?’ And she tried to fancy what the flame of a
candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember
ever having seen such a thing.

After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going
into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the
door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she
went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach
it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her
best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery;
and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing
sat down and cried.

‘Come, there’s no use in crying like that!’ said Alice to herself,
rather sharply; ‘I advise you to leave off this minute!’ She generally
gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it),
and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into
her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having
cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself,
for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people.
‘But it’s no use now,’ thought poor Alice, ‘to pretend to be two people!
Why, there’s hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable person!’

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table:
she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words
‘EAT ME’ were beautifully marked in currants. ‘Well, I’ll eat it,’ said
Alice, ‘and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if it
makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door; so either way I’ll
get into the garden, and I don’t care which happens!’

She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, ‘Which way? Which
way?’, holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was
growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same
size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but Alice
had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way
things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on
in the common way.

So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *




CHAPTER II. The Pool of Tears

‘Curiouser and curiouser!’ cried Alice (she was so much surprised, that
for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good English); ‘now I’m
opening out like the largest telescope that ever was! Good-bye, feet!’
(for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out of
sight, they were getting so far off). ‘Oh, my poor little feet, I wonder
who will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears? I’m sure
_I_ shan’t be able! I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble
myself about you: you must manage the best way you can;--but I must be
kind to them,’ thought Alice, ‘or perhaps they won’t walk the way I want
to go! Let me see: I’ll give them a new pair of boots every Christmas.’

And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it. ‘They must
go by the carrier,’ she thought; ‘and how funny it’ll seem, sending
presents to one’s own feet! And how odd the directions will look!

     ALICE’S RIGHT FOOT, ESQ.
       HEARTHRUG,
         NEAR THE FENDER,
           (WITH ALICE’S LOVE).

Oh dear, what nonsense I’m talking!’

Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was
now more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little golden
key and hurried off to the garden door.

Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to
look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more
hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.

‘You ought to be ashamed of yourself,’ said Alice, ‘a great girl like
you,’ (she might well say this), ‘to go on crying in this way! Stop this
moment, I tell you!’ But she went on all the same, shedding gallons of
tears, until there was a large pool all round her, about four inches
deep and reaching half down the hall.

After a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, and
she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. It was the White
Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves in
one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a great
hurry, muttering to himself as he came, ‘Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess!
Oh! won’t she be savage if I’ve kept her waiting!’ Alice felt so
desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the Rabbit
came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, ‘If you please, sir--’
The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and the fan,
and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.

Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she
kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: ‘Dear, dear! How
queer everything is to-day! And yesterday things went on just as usual.
I wonder if I’ve been changed in the night? Let me think: was I the
same when I got up this morning? I almost think I can remember feeling a
little different. But if I’m not the same, the next question is, Who
in the world am I? Ah, THAT’S the great puzzle!’ And she began thinking
over all the children she knew that were of the same age as herself, to
see if she could have been changed for any of them.

‘I’m sure I’m not Ada,’ she said, ‘for her hair goes in such long
ringlets, and mine doesn’t go in ringlets at all; and I’m sure I can’t
be Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a
very little! Besides, SHE’S she, and I’m I, and--oh dear, how puzzling
it all is! I’ll try if I know all the things I used to know. Let me
see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen, and
four times seven is--oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that rate!
However, the Multiplication Table doesn’t signify: let’s try Geography.
London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome, and
Rome--no, THAT’S all wrong, I’m certain! I must have been changed for
Mabel! I’ll try and say “How doth the little--“’ and she crossed her
hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began to repeat it,
but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words did not come the
same as they used to do:--

     ‘How doth the little crocodile
      Improve his shining tail,
     And pour the waters of the Nile
      On every golden scale!

     ‘How cheerfully he seems to grin,
      How neatly spread his claws,
     And welcome little fishes in
      With gently smiling jaws!’

‘I’m sure those are not the right words,’ said poor Alice, and her eyes
filled with tears again as she went on, ‘I must be Mabel after all, and
I shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to
no toys to play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to learn! No, I’ve
made up my mind about it; if I’m Mabel, I’ll stay down here! It’ll be no
use their putting their heads down and saying “Come up again, dear!” I
shall only look up and say “Who am I then? Tell me that first, and then,
if I like being that person, I’ll come up: if not, I’ll stay down here
till I’m somebody else”--but, oh dear!’ cried Alice, with a sudden burst
of tears, ‘I do wish they WOULD put their heads down! I am so VERY tired
of being all alone here!’

As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see
that she had put on one of the Rabbit’s little white kid gloves while
she was talking. ‘How CAN I have done that?’ she thought. ‘I must
be growing small again.’ She got up and went to the table to measure
herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was now
about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon found
out that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped
it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

‘That WAS a narrow escape!’ said Alice, a good deal frightened at the
sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; ‘and
now for the garden!’ and she ran with all speed back to the little door:
but, alas! the little door was shut again, and the little golden key was
lying on the glass table as before, ‘and things are worse than ever,’
thought the poor child, ‘for I never was so small as this before, never!
And I declare it’s too bad, that it is!’

As she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment, splash!
she was up to her chin in salt water. Her first idea was that she
had somehow fallen into the sea, ‘and in that case I can go back by
railway,’ she said to herself. (Alice had been to the seaside once in
her life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you go
to on the English coast you find a number of bathing machines in the
sea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row
of lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.) However, she soon
made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she
was nine feet high.

‘I wish I hadn’t cried so much!’ said Alice, as she swam about, trying
to find her way out. ‘I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by
being drowned in my own tears! That WILL be a queer thing, to be sure!
However, everything is queer to-day.’

Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way
off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought
it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small
she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had
slipped in like herself.

‘Would it be of any use, now,’ thought Alice, ‘to speak to this mouse?
Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should think very
likely it can talk: at any rate, there’s no harm in trying.’ So she
began: ‘O Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very tired
of swimming about here, O Mouse!’ (Alice thought this must be the right
way of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but
she remembered having seen in her brother’s Latin Grammar, ‘A mouse--of
a mouse--to a mouse--a mouse--O mouse!’) The Mouse looked at her rather
inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes,
but it said nothing.

‘Perhaps it doesn’t understand English,’ thought Alice; ‘I daresay it’s
a French mouse, come over with William the Conqueror.’ (For, with all
her knowledge of history, Alice had no very clear notion how long ago
anything had happened.) So she began again: ‘Ou est ma chatte?’ which
was the first sentence in her French lesson-book. The Mouse gave a
sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.
‘Oh, I beg your pardon!’ cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt
the poor animal’s feelings. ‘I quite forgot you didn’t like cats.’

‘Not like cats!’ cried the Mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice. ‘Would
YOU like cats if you were me?’

‘Well, perhaps not,’ said Alice in a soothing tone: ‘don’t be angry
about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I think you’d
take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. She is such a dear quiet
thing,’ Alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in the
pool, ‘and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her paws and
washing her face--and she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she’s
such a capital one for catching mice--oh, I beg your pardon!’ cried
Alice again, for this time the Mouse was bristling all over, and she
felt certain it must be really offended. ‘We won’t talk about her any
more if you’d rather not.’

‘We indeed!’ cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his
tail. ‘As if I would talk on such a subject! Our family always HATED
cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! Don’t let me hear the name again!’

‘I won’t indeed!’ said Alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of
conversation. ‘Are you--are you fond--of--of dogs?’ The Mouse did not
answer, so Alice went on eagerly: ‘There is such a nice little dog near
our house I should like to show you! A little bright-eyed terrier, you
know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And it’ll fetch things when
you throw them, and it’ll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts
of things--I can’t remember half of them--and it belongs to a farmer,
you know, and he says it’s so useful, it’s worth a hundred pounds! He
says it kills all the rats and--oh dear!’ cried Alice in a sorrowful
tone, ‘I’m afraid I’ve offended it again!’ For the Mouse was swimming
away from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in
the pool as it went.

So she called softly after it, ‘Mouse dear! Do come back again, and we
won’t talk about cats or dogs either, if you don’t like them!’ When the
Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its
face was quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and it said in a low
trembling voice, ‘Let us get to the shore, and then I’ll tell you my
history, and you’ll understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.’

It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the
birds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a Duck and a Dodo,
a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious creatures. Alice led the
way, and the whole party swam to the shore.




CHAPTER III. A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale

They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the bank--the
birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close
to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.

The first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a
consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural
to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if she had
known them all her life. Indeed, she had quite a long argument with the
Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, ‘I am older than
you, and must know better’; and this Alice would not allow without
knowing how old it was, and, as the Lory positively refused to tell its
age, there was no more to be said.

At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them,
called out, ‘Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! I’LL soon make you
dry enough!’ They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the Mouse
in the middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she felt
sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.

‘Ahem!’ said the Mouse with an important air, ‘are you all ready? This
is the driest thing I know. Silence all round, if you please! “William
the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was soon submitted
to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much
accustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin and Morcar, the earls of
Mercia and Northumbria--“’

‘Ugh!’ said the Lory, with a shiver.

‘I beg your pardon!’ said the Mouse, frowning, but very politely: ‘Did
you speak?’

‘Not I!’ said the Lory hastily.

‘I thought you did,’ said the Mouse. ‘--I proceed. “Edwin and Morcar,
the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him: and even Stigand,
the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found it advisable--“’

‘Found WHAT?’ said the Duck.

‘Found IT,’ the Mouse replied rather crossly: ‘of course you know what
“it” means.’

‘I know what “it” means well enough, when I find a thing,’ said the
Duck: ‘it’s generally a frog or a worm. The question is, what did the
archbishop find?’

The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, ‘“--found
it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer him the
crown. William’s conduct at first was moderate. But the insolence of his
Normans--” How are you getting on now, my dear?’ it continued, turning
to Alice as it spoke.

‘As wet as ever,’ said Alice in a melancholy tone: ‘it doesn’t seem to
dry me at all.’

‘In that case,’ said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, ‘I move
that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energetic
remedies--’

‘Speak English!’ said the Eaglet. ‘I don’t know the meaning of half
those long words, and, what’s more, I don’t believe you do either!’ And
the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds
tittered audibly.

‘What I was going to say,’ said the Dodo in an offended tone, ‘was, that
the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race.’

‘What IS a Caucus-race?’ said Alice; not that she wanted much to know,
but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that SOMEBODY ought to speak,
and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.

‘Why,’ said the Dodo, ‘the best way to explain it is to do it.’ (And, as
you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter day, I will tell
you how the Dodo managed it.)

First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, [‘the exact
shape doesn’t matter,’ it said,) and then all the party were placed
along the course, here and there. There was no ‘One, two, three, and
away,’ but they began running when they liked, and left off when they
liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over. However,
when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry again,
the Dodo suddenly called out ‘The race is over!’ and they all crowded
round it, panting, and asking, ‘But who has won?’

This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of thought,
and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its forehead
(the position in which you usually see Shakespeare, in the pictures
of him), while the rest waited in silence. At last the Dodo said,
‘EVERYBODY has won, and all must have prizes.’

‘But who is to give the prizes?’ quite a chorus of voices asked.

‘Why, SHE, of course,’ said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with one finger;
and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a confused
way, ‘Prizes! Prizes!’

Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her
pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water had
not got into it), and handed them round as prizes. There was exactly one
a-piece all round.

‘But she must have a prize herself, you know,’ said the Mouse.

‘Of course,’ the Dodo replied very gravely. ‘What else have you got in
your pocket?’ he went on, turning to Alice.

‘Only a thimble,’ said Alice sadly.

‘Hand it over here,’ said the Dodo.

Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo solemnly
presented the thimble, saying ‘We beg your acceptance of this elegant
thimble’; and, when it had finished this short speech, they all cheered.

Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave
that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything
to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as she
could.

The next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise and
confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not taste
theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back.
However, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, and
begged the Mouse to tell them something more.

‘You promised to tell me your history, you know,’ said Alice, ‘and why
it is you hate--C and D,’ she added in a whisper, half afraid that it
would be offended again.

‘Mine is a long and a sad tale!’ said the Mouse, turning to Alice, and
sighing.

‘It IS a long tail, certainly,’ said Alice, looking down with wonder at
the Mouse’s tail; ‘but why do you call it sad?’ And she kept on puzzling
about it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the tale was
something like this:--

         ‘Fury said to a
         mouse, That he
        met in the
       house,
     “Let us
      both go to
       law: I will
        prosecute
         YOU.--Come,
           I’ll take no
           denial; We
          must have a
        trial: For
      really this
     morning I’ve
    nothing
    to do.”
      Said the
      mouse to the
       cur, “Such
        a trial,
         dear Sir,
            With
          no jury
        or judge,
       would be
      wasting
      our
      breath.”
        “I’ll be
        judge, I’ll
         be jury,”
             Said
         cunning
          old Fury:
          “I’ll
          try the
            whole
            cause,
              and
           condemn
           you
          to
           death.”’


‘You are not attending!’ said the Mouse to Alice severely. ‘What are you
thinking of?’

‘I beg your pardon,’ said Alice very humbly: ‘you had got to the fifth
bend, I think?’

‘I had NOT!’ cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.

‘A knot!’ said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking
anxiously about her. ‘Oh, do let me help to undo it!’

‘I shall do nothing of the sort,’ said the Mouse, getting up and walking
away. ‘You insult me by talking such nonsense!’

‘I didn’t mean it!’ pleaded poor Alice. ‘But you’re so easily offended,
you know!’

The Mouse only growled in reply.

‘Please come back and finish your story!’ Alice called after it; and the
others all joined in chorus, ‘Yes, please do!’ but the Mouse only shook
its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.

‘What a pity it wouldn’t stay!’ sighed the Lory, as soon as it was quite
out of sight; and an old Crab took the opportunity of saying to her
daughter ‘Ah, my dear! Let this be a lesson to you never to lose
YOUR temper!’ ‘Hold your tongue, Ma!’ said the young Crab, a little
snappishly. ‘You’re enough to try the patience of an oyster!’

‘I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!’ said Alice aloud, addressing
nobody in particular. ‘She’d soon fetch it back!’

‘And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?’ said the
Lory.

Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet:
‘Dinah’s our cat. And she’s such a capital one for catching mice you
can’t think! And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds! Why,
she’ll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!’

This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. Some of the
birds hurried off at once: one old Magpie began wrapping itself up very
carefully, remarking, ‘I really must be getting home; the night-air
doesn’t suit my throat!’ and a Canary called out in a trembling voice to
its children, ‘Come away, my dears! It’s high time you were all in bed!’
On various pretexts they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

‘I wish I hadn’t mentioned Dinah!’ she said to herself in a melancholy
tone. ‘Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I’m sure she’s the best
cat in the world! Oh, my dear Dinah! I wonder if I shall ever see you
any more!’ And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very
lonely and low-spirited. In a little while, however, she again heard
a little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up
eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming
back to finish his story.




CHAPTER IV. The Rabbit Sends in a Little Bill

It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking
anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heard
it muttering to itself ‘The Duchess! The Duchess! Oh my dear paws! Oh
my fur and whiskers! She’ll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are
ferrets! Where CAN I have dropped them, I wonder?’ Alice guessed in a
moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves,
and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but they were
nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to have changed since her swim in
the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the little door,
had vanished completely.

Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about, and
called out to her in an angry tone, ‘Why, Mary Ann, what ARE you doing
out here? Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan!
Quick, now!’ And Alice was so much frightened that she ran off at once
in the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the mistake it
had made.

‘He took me for his housemaid,’ she said to herself as she ran. ‘How
surprised he’ll be when he finds out who I am! But I’d better take him
his fan and gloves--that is, if I can find them.’ As she said this, she
came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass
plate with the name ‘W. RABBIT’ engraved upon it. She went in without
knocking, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the
real Mary Ann, and be turned out of the house before she had found the
fan and gloves.

‘How queer it seems,’ Alice said to herself, ‘to be going messages for
a rabbit! I suppose Dinah’ll be sending me on messages next!’ And she
began fancying the sort of thing that would happen: ‘“Miss Alice! Come
here directly, and get ready for your walk!” “Coming in a minute,
nurse! But I’ve got to see that the mouse doesn’t get out.” Only I don’t
think,’ Alice went on, ‘that they’d let Dinah stop in the house if it
began ordering people about like that!’

By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table
in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairs
of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves,
and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a little
bottle that stood near the looking-glass. There was no label this time
with the words ‘DRINK ME,’ but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it
to her lips. ‘I know SOMETHING interesting is sure to happen,’ she said
to herself, ‘whenever I eat or drink anything; so I’ll just see what
this bottle does. I do hope it’ll make me grow large again, for really
I’m quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!’

It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had
drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling,
and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken. She hastily put
down the bottle, saying to herself ‘That’s quite enough--I hope I shan’t
grow any more--As it is, I can’t get out at the door--I do wish I hadn’t
drunk quite so much!’

Alas! it was too late to wish that! She went on growing, and growing,
and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute there
was not even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down with
one elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head.
Still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out
of the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself ‘Now I
can do no more, whatever happens. What WILL become of me?’

Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect,
and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there
seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the room
again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

‘It was much pleasanter at home,’ thought poor Alice, ‘when one wasn’t
always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and
rabbits. I almost wish I hadn’t gone down that rabbit-hole--and yet--and
yet--it’s rather curious, you know, this sort of life! I do wonder what
CAN have happened to me! When I used to read fairy-tales, I fancied that
kind of thing never happened, and now here I am in the middle of one!
There ought to be a book written about me, that there ought! And when I
grow up, I’ll write one--but I’m grown up now,’ she added in a sorrowful
tone; ‘at least there’s no room to grow up any more HERE.’

‘But then,’ thought Alice, ‘shall I NEVER get any older than I am
now? That’ll be a comfort, one way--never to be an old woman--but
then--always to have lessons to learn! Oh, I shouldn’t like THAT!’

‘Oh, you foolish Alice!’ she answered herself. ‘How can you learn
lessons in here? Why, there’s hardly room for YOU, and no room at all
for any lesson-books!’

And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and making
quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes she heard
a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

‘Mary Ann! Mary Ann!’ said the voice. ‘Fetch me my gloves this moment!’
Then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs. Alice knew it was
the Rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook the
house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as large
as the Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.

Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, as
the door opened inwards, and Alice’s elbow was pressed hard against it,
that attempt proved a failure. Alice heard it say to itself ‘Then I’ll
go round and get in at the window.’

‘THAT you won’t’ thought Alice, and, after waiting till she fancied
she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out her
hand, and made a snatch in the air. She did not get hold of anything,
but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass,
from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a
cucumber-frame, or something of the sort.

Next came an angry voice--the Rabbit’s--‘Pat! Pat! Where are you?’ And
then a voice she had never heard before, ‘Sure then I’m here! Digging
for apples, yer honour!’

‘Digging for apples, indeed!’ said the Rabbit angrily. ‘Here! Come and
help me out of THIS!’ (Sounds of more broken glass.)

‘Now tell me, Pat, what’s that in the window?’

‘Sure, it’s an arm, yer honour!’ (He pronounced it ‘arrum.’)

‘An arm, you goose! Who ever saw one that size? Why, it fills the whole
window!’

‘Sure, it does, yer honour: but it’s an arm for all that.’

‘Well, it’s got no business there, at any rate: go and take it away!’

There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear whispers
now and then; such as, ‘Sure, I don’t like it, yer honour, at all, at
all!’ ‘Do as I tell you, you coward!’ and at last she spread out her
hand again, and made another snatch in the air. This time there were
TWO little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. ‘What a number of
cucumber-frames there must be!’ thought Alice. ‘I wonder what they’ll do
next! As for pulling me out of the window, I only wish they COULD! I’m
sure I don’t want to stay in here any longer!’

She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a
rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voices
all talking together: she made out the words: ‘Where’s the other
ladder?--Why, I hadn’t to bring but one; Bill’s got the other--Bill!
fetch it here, lad!--Here, put ‘em up at this corner--No, tie ‘em
together first--they don’t reach half high enough yet--Oh! they’ll
do well enough; don’t be particular--Here, Bill! catch hold of this
rope--Will the roof bear?--Mind that loose slate--Oh, it’s coming
down! Heads below!’ (a loud crash)--‘Now, who did that?--It was Bill, I
fancy--Who’s to go down the chimney?--Nay, I shan’t! YOU do it!--That I
won’t, then!--Bill’s to go down--Here, Bill! the master says you’re to
go down the chimney!’

‘Oh! So Bill’s got to come down the chimney, has he?’ said Alice to
herself. ‘Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill! I wouldn’t be in
Bill’s place for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; but
I THINK I can kick a little!’

She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waited
till she heard a little animal (she couldn’t guess of what sort it was)
scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then,
saying to herself ‘This is Bill,’ she gave one sharp kick, and waited to
see what would happen next.

The first thing she heard was a general chorus of ‘There goes Bill!’
then the Rabbit’s voice along--‘Catch him, you by the hedge!’ then
silence, and then another confusion of voices--‘Hold up his head--Brandy
now--Don’t choke him--How was it, old fellow? What happened to you? Tell
us all about it!’

Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, [‘That’s Bill,’ thought
Alice,) ‘Well, I hardly know--No more, thank ye; I’m better now--but I’m
a deal too flustered to tell you--all I know is, something comes at me
like a Jack-in-the-box, and up I goes like a sky-rocket!’

‘So you did, old fellow!’ said the others.

‘We must burn the house down!’ said the Rabbit’s voice; and Alice called
out as loud as she could, ‘If you do. I’ll set Dinah at you!’

There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to herself, ‘I
wonder what they WILL do next! If they had any sense, they’d take the
roof off.’ After a minute or two, they began moving about again, and
Alice heard the Rabbit say, ‘A barrowful will do, to begin with.’

‘A barrowful of WHAT?’ thought Alice; but she had not long to doubt,
for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the
window, and some of them hit her in the face. ‘I’ll put a stop to this,’
she said to herself, and shouted out, ‘You’d better not do that again!’
which produced another dead silence.

Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into
little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her
head. ‘If I eat one of these cakes,’ she thought, ‘it’s sure to make
SOME change in my size; and as it can’t possibly make me larger, it must
make me smaller, I suppose.’

So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she
began shrinking directly. As soon as she was small enough to get through
the door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of little
animals and birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard, Bill, was
in the middle, being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giving it
something out of a bottle. They all made a rush at Alice the moment she
appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself
safe in a thick wood.

‘The first thing I’ve got to do,’ said Alice to herself, as she wandered
about in the wood, ‘is to grow to my right size again; and the second
thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. I think that will be
the best plan.’

It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply
arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest idea
how to set about it; and while she was peering about anxiously among
the trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a
great hurry.

An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and
feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her. ‘Poor little thing!’
said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to it; but
she was terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it might be
hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in spite of
all her coaxing.

Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and
held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off
all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick,
and made believe to worry it; then Alice dodged behind a great thistle,
to keep herself from being run over; and the moment she appeared on the
other side, the puppy made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head
over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was
very like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; then
the puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a very
little way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely
all the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with
its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she
set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath, and
till the puppy’s bark sounded quite faint in the distance.

‘And yet what a dear little puppy it was!’ said Alice, as she leant
against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the
leaves: ‘I should have liked teaching it tricks very much, if--if I’d
only been the right size to do it! Oh dear! I’d nearly forgotten that
I’ve got to grow up again! Let me see--how IS it to be managed? I
suppose I ought to eat or drink something or other; but the great
question is, what?’

The great question certainly was, what? Alice looked all round her at
the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see anything that
looked like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances.
There was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as
herself; and when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and
behind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see what
was on the top of it.

She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the
mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large caterpillar,
that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, quietly smoking a long
hookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or of anything else.




CHAPTER V. Advice from a Caterpillar

The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some time in silence:
at last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and addressed
her in a languid, sleepy voice.

‘Who are YOU?’ said the Caterpillar.

This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. Alice replied,
rather shyly, ‘I--I hardly know, sir, just at present--at least I know
who I WAS when I got up this morning, but I think I must have been
changed several times since then.’

‘What do you mean by that?’ said the Caterpillar sternly. ‘Explain
yourself!’

‘I can’t explain MYSELF, I’m afraid, sir’ said Alice, ‘because I’m not
myself, you see.’

‘I don’t see,’ said the Caterpillar.

‘I’m afraid I can’t put it more clearly,’ Alice replied very politely,
‘for I can’t understand it myself to begin with; and being so many
different sizes in a day is very confusing.’

‘It isn’t,’ said the Caterpillar.

‘Well, perhaps you haven’t found it so yet,’ said Alice; ‘but when you
have to turn into a chrysalis--you will some day, you know--and then
after that into a butterfly, I should think you’ll feel it a little
queer, won’t you?’

‘Not a bit,’ said the Caterpillar.

‘Well, perhaps your feelings may be different,’ said Alice; ‘all I know
is, it would feel very queer to ME.’

‘You!’ said the Caterpillar contemptuously. ‘Who are YOU?’

Which brought them back again to the beginning of the conversation.
Alice felt a little irritated at the Caterpillar’s making such VERY
short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, ‘I think,
you ought to tell me who YOU are, first.’

‘Why?’ said the Caterpillar.

Here was another puzzling question; and as Alice could not think of any
good reason, and as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a VERY unpleasant
state of mind, she turned away.

‘Come back!’ the Caterpillar called after her. ‘I’ve something important
to say!’

This sounded promising, certainly: Alice turned and came back again.

‘Keep your temper,’ said the Caterpillar.

‘Is that all?’ said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she
could.

‘No,’ said the Caterpillar.

Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do, and
perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing. For some
minutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded its
arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, ‘So you think
you’re changed, do you?’

‘I’m afraid I am, sir,’ said Alice; ‘I can’t remember things as I
used--and I don’t keep the same size for ten minutes together!’

‘Can’t remember WHAT things?’ said the Caterpillar.

‘Well, I’ve tried to say “HOW DOTH THE LITTLE BUSY BEE,” but it all came
different!’ Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.

‘Repeat, “YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,”’ said the Caterpillar.

Alice folded her hands, and began:--

   ‘You are old, Father William,’ the young man said,
    ‘And your hair has become very white;
   And yet you incessantly stand on your head--
    Do you think, at your age, it is right?’

   ‘In my youth,’ Father William replied to his son,
    ‘I feared it might injure the brain;
   But, now that I’m perfectly sure I have none,
    Why, I do it again and again.’

   ‘You are old,’ said the youth, ‘as I mentioned before,
    And have grown most uncommonly fat;
   Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door--
    Pray, what is the reason of that?’

   ‘In my youth,’ said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
    ‘I kept all my limbs very supple
   By the use of this ointment--one shilling the box--
    Allow me to sell you a couple?’

   ‘You are old,’ said the youth, ‘and your jaws are too weak
    For anything tougher than suet;
   Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak--
    Pray how did you manage to do it?’

   ‘In my youth,’ said his father, ‘I took to the law,
    And argued each case with my wife;
   And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
    Has lasted the rest of my life.’

   ‘You are old,’ said the youth, ‘one would hardly suppose
    That your eye was as steady as ever;
   Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose--
    What made you so awfully clever?’

   ‘I have answered three questions, and that is enough,’
    Said his father; ‘don’t give yourself airs!
   Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
    Be off, or I’ll kick you down stairs!’


‘That is not said right,’ said the Caterpillar.

‘Not QUITE right, I’m afraid,’ said Alice, timidly; ‘some of the words
have got altered.’

‘It is wrong from beginning to end,’ said the Caterpillar decidedly, and
there was silence for some minutes.

The Caterpillar was the first to speak.

‘What size do you want to be?’ it asked.

‘Oh, I’m not particular as to size,’ Alice hastily replied; ‘only one
doesn’t like changing so often, you know.’

‘I DON’T know,’ said the Caterpillar.

Alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in her life
before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.

‘Are you content now?’ said the Caterpillar.

‘Well, I should like to be a LITTLE larger, sir, if you wouldn’t mind,’
said Alice: ‘three inches is such a wretched height to be.’

‘It is a very good height indeed!’ said the Caterpillar angrily, rearing
itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).

‘But I’m not used to it!’ pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone. And
she thought of herself, ‘I wish the creatures wouldn’t be so easily
offended!’

‘You’ll get used to it in time,’ said the Caterpillar; and it put the
hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.

This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again. In
a minute or two the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth
and yawned once or twice, and shook itself. Then it got down off the
mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely remarking as it went,
‘One side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you
grow shorter.’

‘One side of WHAT? The other side of WHAT?’ thought Alice to herself.

‘Of the mushroom,’ said the Caterpillar, just as if she had asked it
aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.

Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute, trying
to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was perfectly
round, she found this a very difficult question. However, at last she
stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bit
of the edge with each hand.

‘And now which is which?’ she said to herself, and nibbled a little of
the right-hand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a violent
blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!

She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt
that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she
set to work at once to eat some of the other bit. Her chin was pressed
so closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her
mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of the
lefthand bit.


  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘Come, my head’s free at last!’ said Alice in a tone of delight, which
changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulders
were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was
an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a
sea of green leaves that lay far below her.

‘What CAN all that green stuff be?’ said Alice. ‘And where HAVE my
shoulders got to? And oh, my poor hands, how is it I can’t see you?’
She was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow,
except a little shaking among the distant green leaves.

As there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head, she
tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that her
neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent. She had
just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was going
to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but the tops
of the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made
her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and
was beating her violently with its wings.

‘Serpent!’ screamed the Pigeon.

‘I’m NOT a serpent!’ said Alice indignantly. ‘Let me alone!’

‘Serpent, I say again!’ repeated the Pigeon, but in a more subdued tone,
and added with a kind of sob, ‘I’ve tried every way, and nothing seems
to suit them!’

‘I haven’t the least idea what you’re talking about,’ said Alice.

‘I’ve tried the roots of trees, and I’ve tried banks, and I’ve tried
hedges,’ the Pigeon went on, without attending to her; ‘but those
serpents! There’s no pleasing them!’

Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use in
saying anything more till the Pigeon had finished.

‘As if it wasn’t trouble enough hatching the eggs,’ said the Pigeon;
‘but I must be on the look-out for serpents night and day! Why, I
haven’t had a wink of sleep these three weeks!’

‘I’m very sorry you’ve been annoyed,’ said Alice, who was beginning to
see its meaning.

‘And just as I’d taken the highest tree in the wood,’ continued the
Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, ‘and just as I was thinking I
should be free of them at last, they must needs come wriggling down from
the sky! Ugh, Serpent!’

‘But I’m NOT a serpent, I tell you!’ said Alice. ‘I’m a--I’m a--’

‘Well! WHAT are you?’ said the Pigeon. ‘I can see you’re trying to
invent something!’

‘I--I’m a little girl,’ said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she remembered
the number of changes she had gone through that day.

‘A likely story indeed!’ said the Pigeon in a tone of the deepest
contempt. ‘I’ve seen a good many little girls in my time, but never ONE
with such a neck as that! No, no! You’re a serpent; and there’s no use
denying it. I suppose you’ll be telling me next that you never tasted an
egg!’

‘I HAVE tasted eggs, certainly,’ said Alice, who was a very truthful
child; ‘but little girls eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, you
know.’

‘I don’t believe it,’ said the Pigeon; ‘but if they do, why then they’re
a kind of serpent, that’s all I can say.’

This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent for a
minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the opportunity of adding, ‘You’re
looking for eggs, I know THAT well enough; and what does it matter to me
whether you’re a little girl or a serpent?’

‘It matters a good deal to ME,’ said Alice hastily; ‘but I’m not looking
for eggs, as it happens; and if I was, I shouldn’t want YOURS: I don’t
like them raw.’

‘Well, be off, then!’ said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled
down again into its nest. Alice crouched down among the trees as well as
she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches, and
every now and then she had to stop and untwist it. After a while she
remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands, and
she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the
other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had
succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

It was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that it
felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes,
and began talking to herself, as usual. ‘Come, there’s half my plan done
now! How puzzling all these changes are! I’m never sure what I’m going
to be, from one minute to another! However, I’ve got back to my right
size: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful garden--how IS that
to be done, I wonder?’ As she said this, she came suddenly upon an open
place, with a little house in it about four feet high. ‘Whoever lives
there,’ thought Alice, ‘it’ll never do to come upon them THIS size: why,
I should frighten them out of their wits!’ So she began nibbling at the
righthand bit again, and did not venture to go near the house till she
had brought herself down to nine inches high.




CHAPTER VI. Pig and Pepper

For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and wondering what
to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came running out of the
wood--(she considered him to be a footman because he was in livery:
otherwise, judging by his face only, she would have called him a
fish)--and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles. It was opened
by another footman in livery, with a round face, and large eyes like a
frog; and both footmen, Alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled all
over their heads. She felt very curious to know what it was all about,
and crept a little way out of the wood to listen.

The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his arm a great letter,
nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to the other,
saying, in a solemn tone, ‘For the Duchess. An invitation from the Queen
to play croquet.’ The Frog-Footman repeated, in the same solemn tone,
only changing the order of the words a little, ‘From the Queen. An
invitation for the Duchess to play croquet.’

Then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled together.

Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the
wood for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped out the
Fish-Footman was gone, and the other was sitting on the ground near the
door, staring stupidly up into the sky.

Alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked.

‘There’s no sort of use in knocking,’ said the Footman, ‘and that for
two reasons. First, because I’m on the same side of the door as you
are; secondly, because they’re making such a noise inside, no one could
possibly hear you.’ And certainly there was a most extraordinary noise
going on within--a constant howling and sneezing, and every now and then
a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to pieces.

‘Please, then,’ said Alice, ‘how am I to get in?’

‘There might be some sense in your knocking,’ the Footman went on
without attending to her, ‘if we had the door between us. For instance,
if you were INSIDE, you might knock, and I could let you out, you know.’
He was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, and this
Alice thought decidedly uncivil. ‘But perhaps he can’t help it,’ she
said to herself; ‘his eyes are so VERY nearly at the top of his head.
But at any rate he might answer questions.--How am I to get in?’ she
repeated, aloud.

‘I shall sit here,’ the Footman remarked, ‘till tomorrow--’

At this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came
skimming out, straight at the Footman’s head: it just grazed his nose,
and broke to pieces against one of the trees behind him.

‘--or next day, maybe,’ the Footman continued in the same tone, exactly
as if nothing had happened.

‘How am I to get in?’ asked Alice again, in a louder tone.

‘ARE you to get in at all?’ said the Footman. ‘That’s the first
question, you know.’

It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so. ‘It’s really
dreadful,’ she muttered to herself, ‘the way all the creatures argue.
It’s enough to drive one crazy!’

The Footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for repeating his
remark, with variations. ‘I shall sit here,’ he said, ‘on and off, for
days and days.’

‘But what am I to do?’ said Alice.

‘Anything you like,’ said the Footman, and began whistling.

‘Oh, there’s no use in talking to him,’ said Alice desperately: ‘he’s
perfectly idiotic!’ And she opened the door and went in.

The door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from
one end to the other: the Duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool in
the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was leaning over the fire, stirring
a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.

‘There’s certainly too much pepper in that soup!’ Alice said to herself,
as well as she could for sneezing.

There was certainly too much of it in the air. Even the Duchess
sneezed occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howling
alternately without a moment’s pause. The only things in the kitchen
that did not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting on
the hearth and grinning from ear to ear.

‘Please would you tell me,’ said Alice, a little timidly, for she was
not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, ‘why
your cat grins like that?’

‘It’s a Cheshire cat,’ said the Duchess, ‘and that’s why. Pig!’

She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice quite
jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the baby,
and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again:--

‘I didn’t know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I didn’t know
that cats COULD grin.’

‘They all can,’ said the Duchess; ‘and most of ‘em do.’

‘I don’t know of any that do,’ Alice said very politely, feeling quite
pleased to have got into a conversation.

‘You don’t know much,’ said the Duchess; ‘and that’s a fact.’

Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it would
be as well to introduce some other subject of conversation. While she
was trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the
fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at
the Duchess and the baby--the fire-irons came first; then followed a
shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes. The Duchess took no notice of
them even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already,
that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

‘Oh, PLEASE mind what you’re doing!’ cried Alice, jumping up and down in
an agony of terror. ‘Oh, there goes his PRECIOUS nose’; as an unusually
large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it off.

‘If everybody minded their own business,’ the Duchess said in a hoarse
growl, ‘the world would go round a deal faster than it does.’

‘Which would NOT be an advantage,’ said Alice, who felt very glad to get
an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. ‘Just think of
what work it would make with the day and night! You see the earth takes
twenty-four hours to turn round on its axis--’

‘Talking of axes,’ said the Duchess, ‘chop off her head!’

Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take
the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to
be listening, so she went on again: ‘Twenty-four hours, I THINK; or is
it twelve? I--’

‘Oh, don’t bother ME,’ said the Duchess; ‘I never could abide figures!’
And with that she began nursing her child again, singing a sort of
lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at the end of
every line:

   ‘Speak roughly to your little boy,
    And beat him when he sneezes:
   He only does it to annoy,
    Because he knows it teases.’

         CHORUS.

 (In which the cook and the baby joined):--

       ‘Wow! wow! wow!’

While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing
the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so,
that Alice could hardly hear the words:--

   ‘I speak severely to my boy,
    I beat him when he sneezes;
   For he can thoroughly enjoy
    The pepper when he pleases!’

         CHORUS.

       ‘Wow! wow! wow!’

‘Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!’ the Duchess said to Alice,
flinging the baby at her as she spoke. ‘I must go and get ready to play
croquet with the Queen,’ and she hurried out of the room. The cook threw
a frying-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.

Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped
little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions, ‘just
like a star-fish,’ thought Alice. The poor little thing was snorting
like a steam-engine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and
straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the first minute
or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.

As soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was to
twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its right
ear and left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried
it out into the open air. ‘IF I don’t take this child away with me,’
thought Alice, ‘they’re sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn’t it be
murder to leave it behind?’ She said the last words out loud, and the
little thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time).
‘Don’t grunt,’ said Alice; ‘that’s not at all a proper way of expressing
yourself.’

The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into its face to
see what was the matter with it. There could be no doubt that it had
a VERY turn-up nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also its
eyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogether Alice did not
like the look of the thing at all. ‘But perhaps it was only sobbing,’
she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there were any
tears.

No, there were no tears. ‘If you’re going to turn into a pig, my dear,’
said Alice, seriously, ‘I’ll have nothing more to do with you. Mind
now!’ The poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossible
to say which), and they went on for some while in silence.

Alice was just beginning to think to herself, ‘Now, what am I to do with
this creature when I get it home?’ when it grunted again, so violently,
that she looked down into its face in some alarm. This time there could
be NO mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than a pig, and she
felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it further.

So she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to see
it trot away quietly into the wood. ‘If it had grown up,’ she said
to herself, ‘it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes
rather a handsome pig, I think.’ And she began thinking over other
children she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just saying
to herself, ‘if one only knew the right way to change them--’ when she
was a little startled by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of a
tree a few yards off.

The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked good-natured, she
thought: still it had VERY long claws and a great many teeth, so she
felt that it ought to be treated with respect.

‘Cheshire Puss,’ she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know
whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little wider.
‘Come, it’s pleased so far,’ thought Alice, and she went on. ‘Would you
tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?’

‘That depends a good deal on where you want to get to,’ said the Cat.

‘I don’t much care where--’ said Alice.

‘Then it doesn’t matter which way you go,’ said the Cat.

‘--so long as I get SOMEWHERE,’ Alice added as an explanation.

‘Oh, you’re sure to do that,’ said the Cat, ‘if you only walk long
enough.’

Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another question.
‘What sort of people live about here?’

‘In THAT direction,’ the Cat said, waving its right paw round, ‘lives
a Hatter: and in THAT direction,’ waving the other paw, ‘lives a March
Hare. Visit either you like: they’re both mad.’

‘But I don’t want to go among mad people,’ Alice remarked.

‘Oh, you can’t help that,’ said the Cat: ‘we’re all mad here. I’m mad.
You’re mad.’

‘How do you know I’m mad?’ said Alice.

‘You must be,’ said the Cat, ‘or you wouldn’t have come here.’

Alice didn’t think that proved it at all; however, she went on ‘And how
do you know that you’re mad?’

‘To begin with,’ said the Cat, ‘a dog’s not mad. You grant that?’

‘I suppose so,’ said Alice.

‘Well, then,’ the Cat went on, ‘you see, a dog growls when it’s angry,
and wags its tail when it’s pleased. Now I growl when I’m pleased, and
wag my tail when I’m angry. Therefore I’m mad.’

‘I call it purring, not growling,’ said Alice.

‘Call it what you like,’ said the Cat. ‘Do you play croquet with the
Queen to-day?’

‘I should like it very much,’ said Alice, ‘but I haven’t been invited
yet.’

‘You’ll see me there,’ said the Cat, and vanished.

Alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer
things happening. While she was looking at the place where it had been,
it suddenly appeared again.

‘By-the-bye, what became of the baby?’ said the Cat. ‘I’d nearly
forgotten to ask.’

‘It turned into a pig,’ Alice quietly said, just as if it had come back
in a natural way.

‘I thought it would,’ said the Cat, and vanished again.

Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not
appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction in
which the March Hare was said to live. ‘I’ve seen hatters before,’ she
said to herself; ‘the March Hare will be much the most interesting, and
perhaps as this is May it won’t be raving mad--at least not so mad as
it was in March.’ As she said this, she looked up, and there was the Cat
again, sitting on a branch of a tree.

‘Did you say pig, or fig?’ said the Cat.

‘I said pig,’ replied Alice; ‘and I wish you wouldn’t keep appearing and
vanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy.’

‘All right,’ said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly,
beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, which
remained some time after the rest of it had gone.

‘Well! I’ve often seen a cat without a grin,’ thought Alice; ‘but a grin
without a cat! It’s the most curious thing I ever saw in my life!’

She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house
of the March Hare: she thought it must be the right house, because the
chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur. It
was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had
nibbled some more of the lefthand bit of mushroom, and raised herself to
about two feet high: even then she walked up towards it rather timidly,
saying to herself ‘Suppose it should be raving mad after all! I almost
wish I’d gone to see the Hatter instead!’




CHAPTER VII. A Mad Tea-Party

There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the
March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was sitting
between them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as a
cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking over its head. ‘Very
uncomfortable for the Dormouse,’ thought Alice; ‘only, as it’s asleep, I
suppose it doesn’t mind.’

The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at
one corner of it: ‘No room! No room!’ they cried out when they saw Alice
coming. ‘There’s PLENTY of room!’ said Alice indignantly, and she sat
down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.

‘Have some wine,’ the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

Alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea.
‘I don’t see any wine,’ she remarked.

‘There isn’t any,’ said the March Hare.

‘Then it wasn’t very civil of you to offer it,’ said Alice angrily.

‘It wasn’t very civil of you to sit down without being invited,’ said
the March Hare.

‘I didn’t know it was YOUR table,’ said Alice; ‘it’s laid for a great
many more than three.’

‘Your hair wants cutting,’ said the Hatter. He had been looking at Alice
for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first speech.

‘You should learn not to make personal remarks,’ Alice said with some
severity; ‘it’s very rude.’

The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he SAID
was, ‘Why is a raven like a writing-desk?’

‘Come, we shall have some fun now!’ thought Alice. ‘I’m glad they’ve
begun asking riddles.--I believe I can guess that,’ she added aloud.

‘Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?’ said the
March Hare.

‘Exactly so,’ said Alice.

‘Then you should say what you mean,’ the March Hare went on.

‘I do,’ Alice hastily replied; ‘at least--at least I mean what I
say--that’s the same thing, you know.’

‘Not the same thing a bit!’ said the Hatter. ‘You might just as well say
that “I see what I eat” is the same thing as “I eat what I see”!’

‘You might just as well say,’ added the March Hare, ‘that “I like what I
get” is the same thing as “I get what I like”!’

‘You might just as well say,’ added the Dormouse, who seemed to be
talking in his sleep, ‘that “I breathe when I sleep” is the same thing
as “I sleep when I breathe”!’

‘It IS the same thing with you,’ said the Hatter, and here the
conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while Alice
thought over all she could remember about ravens and writing-desks,
which wasn’t much.

The Hatter was the first to break the silence. ‘What day of the month
is it?’ he said, turning to Alice: he had taken his watch out of his
pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then,
and holding it to his ear.

Alice considered a little, and then said ‘The fourth.’

‘Two days wrong!’ sighed the Hatter. ‘I told you butter wouldn’t suit
the works!’ he added looking angrily at the March Hare.

‘It was the BEST butter,’ the March Hare meekly replied.

‘Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,’ the Hatter grumbled:
‘you shouldn’t have put it in with the bread-knife.’

The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped
it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of
nothing better to say than his first remark, ‘It was the BEST butter,
you know.’

Alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity. ‘What a
funny watch!’ she remarked. ‘It tells the day of the month, and doesn’t
tell what o’clock it is!’

‘Why should it?’ muttered the Hatter. ‘Does YOUR watch tell you what
year it is?’

‘Of course not,’ Alice replied very readily: ‘but that’s because it
stays the same year for such a long time together.’

‘Which is just the case with MINE,’ said the Hatter.

Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. The Hatter’s remark seemed to have no
sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English. ‘I don’t quite
understand you,’ she said, as politely as she could.

‘The Dormouse is asleep again,’ said the Hatter, and he poured a little
hot tea upon its nose.

The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening its
eyes, ‘Of course, of course; just what I was going to remark myself.’

‘Have you guessed the riddle yet?’ the Hatter said, turning to Alice
again.

‘No, I give it up,’ Alice replied: ‘what’s the answer?’

‘I haven’t the slightest idea,’ said the Hatter.

‘Nor I,’ said the March Hare.

Alice sighed wearily. ‘I think you might do something better with the
time,’ she said, ‘than waste it in asking riddles that have no answers.’

‘If you knew Time as well as I do,’ said the Hatter, ‘you wouldn’t talk
about wasting IT. It’s HIM.’

‘I don’t know what you mean,’ said Alice.

‘Of course you don’t!’ the Hatter said, tossing his head contemptuously.
‘I dare say you never even spoke to Time!’

‘Perhaps not,’ Alice cautiously replied: ‘but I know I have to beat time
when I learn music.’

‘Ah! that accounts for it,’ said the Hatter. ‘He won’t stand beating.
Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he’d do almost anything
you liked with the clock. For instance, suppose it were nine o’clock in
the morning, just time to begin lessons: you’d only have to whisper a
hint to Time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling! Half-past one,
time for dinner!’

[‘I only wish it was,’ the March Hare said to itself in a whisper.)

‘That would be grand, certainly,’ said Alice thoughtfully: ‘but then--I
shouldn’t be hungry for it, you know.’

‘Not at first, perhaps,’ said the Hatter: ‘but you could keep it to
half-past one as long as you liked.’

‘Is that the way YOU manage?’ Alice asked.

The Hatter shook his head mournfully. ‘Not I!’ he replied. ‘We
quarrelled last March--just before HE went mad, you know--’ (pointing
with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) ‘--it was at the great concert
given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing

     “Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
     How I wonder what you’re at!”

You know the song, perhaps?’

‘I’ve heard something like it,’ said Alice.

‘It goes on, you know,’ the Hatter continued, ‘in this way:--

     “Up above the world you fly,
     Like a tea-tray in the sky.
         Twinkle, twinkle--“’

Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep ‘Twinkle,
twinkle, twinkle, twinkle--’ and went on so long that they had to pinch
it to make it stop.

‘Well, I’d hardly finished the first verse,’ said the Hatter, ‘when the
Queen jumped up and bawled out, “He’s murdering the time! Off with his
head!”’

‘How dreadfully savage!’ exclaimed Alice.

‘And ever since that,’ the Hatter went on in a mournful tone, ‘he won’t
do a thing I ask! It’s always six o’clock now.’

A bright idea came into Alice’s head. ‘Is that the reason so many
tea-things are put out here?’ she asked.

‘Yes, that’s it,’ said the Hatter with a sigh: ‘it’s always tea-time,
and we’ve no time to wash the things between whiles.’

‘Then you keep moving round, I suppose?’ said Alice.

‘Exactly so,’ said the Hatter: ‘as the things get used up.’

‘But what happens when you come to the beginning again?’ Alice ventured
to ask.

‘Suppose we change the subject,’ the March Hare interrupted, yawning.
‘I’m getting tired of this. I vote the young lady tells us a story.’

‘I’m afraid I don’t know one,’ said Alice, rather alarmed at the
proposal.

‘Then the Dormouse shall!’ they both cried. ‘Wake up, Dormouse!’ And
they pinched it on both sides at once.

The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. ‘I wasn’t asleep,’ he said in a
hoarse, feeble voice: ‘I heard every word you fellows were saying.’

‘Tell us a story!’ said the March Hare.

‘Yes, please do!’ pleaded Alice.

‘And be quick about it,’ added the Hatter, ‘or you’ll be asleep again
before it’s done.’

‘Once upon a time there were three little sisters,’ the Dormouse began
in a great hurry; ‘and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie; and
they lived at the bottom of a well--’

‘What did they live on?’ said Alice, who always took a great interest in
questions of eating and drinking.

‘They lived on treacle,’ said the Dormouse, after thinking a minute or
two.

‘They couldn’t have done that, you know,’ Alice gently remarked; ‘they’d
have been ill.’

‘So they were,’ said the Dormouse; ‘VERY ill.’

Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways of
living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: ‘But
why did they live at the bottom of a well?’

‘Take some more tea,’ the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.

‘I’ve had nothing yet,’ Alice replied in an offended tone, ‘so I can’t
take more.’

‘You mean you can’t take LESS,’ said the Hatter: ‘it’s very easy to take
MORE than nothing.’

‘Nobody asked YOUR opinion,’ said Alice.

‘Who’s making personal remarks now?’ the Hatter asked triumphantly.

Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself
to some tea and bread-and-butter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and
repeated her question. ‘Why did they live at the bottom of a well?’

The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then
said, ‘It was a treacle-well.’

‘There’s no such thing!’ Alice was beginning very angrily, but the
Hatter and the March Hare went ‘Sh! sh!’ and the Dormouse sulkily
remarked, ‘If you can’t be civil, you’d better finish the story for
yourself.’

‘No, please go on!’ Alice said very humbly; ‘I won’t interrupt again. I
dare say there may be ONE.’

‘One, indeed!’ said the Dormouse indignantly. However, he consented to
go on. ‘And so these three little sisters--they were learning to draw,
you know--’

‘What did they draw?’ said Alice, quite forgetting her promise.

‘Treacle,’ said the Dormouse, without considering at all this time.

‘I want a clean cup,’ interrupted the Hatter: ‘let’s all move one place
on.’

He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse followed him: the March Hare
moved into the Dormouse’s place, and Alice rather unwillingly took
the place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the only one who got any
advantage from the change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than
before, as the March Hare had just upset the milk-jug into his plate.

Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began very
cautiously: ‘But I don’t understand. Where did they draw the treacle
from?’

‘You can draw water out of a water-well,’ said the Hatter; ‘so I should
think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well--eh, stupid?’

‘But they were IN the well,’ Alice said to the Dormouse, not choosing to
notice this last remark.

‘Of course they were’, said the Dormouse; ‘--well in.’

This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse go on for
some time without interrupting it.

‘They were learning to draw,’ the Dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing
its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; ‘and they drew all manner of
things--everything that begins with an M--’

‘Why with an M?’ said Alice.

‘Why not?’ said the March Hare.

Alice was silent.

The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into
a doze; but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again with
a little shriek, and went on: ‘--that begins with an M, such as
mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness--you know you say
things are “much of a muchness”--did you ever see such a thing as a
drawing of a muchness?’

‘Really, now you ask me,’ said Alice, very much confused, ‘I don’t
think--’

‘Then you shouldn’t talk,’ said the Hatter.

This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in
great disgust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep instantly, and
neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she
looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her:
the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the Dormouse into
the teapot.

‘At any rate I’ll never go THERE again!’ said Alice as she picked her
way through the wood. ‘It’s the stupidest tea-party I ever was at in all
my life!’

Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door
leading right into it. ‘That’s very curious!’ she thought. ‘But
everything’s curious today. I think I may as well go in at once.’ And in
she went.

Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little
glass table. ‘Now, I’ll manage better this time,’ she said to herself,
and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that
led into the garden. Then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom (she
had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high:
then she walked down the little passage: and THEN--she found herself at
last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the cool
fountains.




CHAPTER VIII. The Queen’s Croquet-Ground

A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses
growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily
painting them red. Alice thought this a very curious thing, and she went
nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of
them say, ‘Look out now, Five! Don’t go splashing paint over me like
that!’

‘I couldn’t help it,’ said Five, in a sulky tone; ‘Seven jogged my
elbow.’

On which Seven looked up and said, ‘That’s right, Five! Always lay the
blame on others!’

‘YOU’D better not talk!’ said Five. ‘I heard the Queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!’

‘What for?’ said the one who had spoken first.

‘That’s none of YOUR business, Two!’ said Seven.

‘Yes, it IS his business!’ said Five, ‘and I’ll tell him--it was for
bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.’

Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun ‘Well, of all the unjust
things--’ when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching
them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also, and
all of them bowed low.

‘Would you tell me,’ said Alice, a little timidly, ‘why you are painting
those roses?’

Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began in a low
voice, ‘Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a
RED rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the Queen
was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know.
So you see, Miss, we’re doing our best, afore she comes, to--’ At this
moment Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called
out ‘The Queen! The Queen!’ and the three gardeners instantly threw
themselves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many footsteps,
and Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen.

First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like
the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the
corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with
diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did. After these came
the royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears came
jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all ornamented
with hearts. Next came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among
them Alice recognised the White Rabbit: it was talking in a hurried
nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without
noticing her. Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the King’s
crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this grand
procession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face
like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard
of such a rule at processions; ‘and besides, what would be the use of
a procession,’ thought she, ‘if people had all to lie down upon their
faces, so that they couldn’t see it?’ So she stood still where she was,
and waited.

When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked
at her, and the Queen said severely ‘Who is this?’ She said it to the
Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

‘Idiot!’ said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to
Alice, she went on, ‘What’s your name, child?’

‘My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,’ said Alice very politely;
but she added, to herself, ‘Why, they’re only a pack of cards, after
all. I needn’t be afraid of them!’

‘And who are THESE?’ said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners who
were lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as they were lying on their
faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of the
pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers, or
courtiers, or three of her own children.

‘How should I know?’ said Alice, surprised at her own courage. ‘It’s no
business of MINE.’

The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a
moment like a wild beast, screamed ‘Off with her head! Off--’

‘Nonsense!’ said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen was
silent.

The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said ‘Consider, my
dear: she is only a child!’

The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave ‘Turn them
over!’

The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

‘Get up!’ said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three
gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen,
the royal children, and everybody else.

‘Leave off that!’ screamed the Queen. ‘You make me giddy.’ And then,
turning to the rose-tree, she went on, ‘What HAVE you been doing here?’

‘May it please your Majesty,’ said Two, in a very humble tone, going
down on one knee as he spoke, ‘we were trying--’

‘I see!’ said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses.
‘Off with their heads!’ and the procession moved on, three of the
soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran
to Alice for protection.

‘You shan’t be beheaded!’ said Alice, and she put them into a large
flower-pot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about for a
minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the
others.

‘Are their heads off?’ shouted the Queen.

‘Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!’ the soldiers shouted
in reply.

‘That’s right!’ shouted the Queen. ‘Can you play croquet?’

The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question was
evidently meant for her.

‘Yes!’ shouted Alice.

‘Come on, then!’ roared the Queen, and Alice joined the procession,
wondering very much what would happen next.

‘It’s--it’s a very fine day!’ said a timid voice at her side. She was
walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.

‘Very,’ said Alice: ‘--where’s the Duchess?’

‘Hush! Hush!’ said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone. He looked
anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon
tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered ‘She’s under
sentence of execution.’

‘What for?’ said Alice.

‘Did you say “What a pity!”?’ the Rabbit asked.

‘No, I didn’t,’ said Alice: ‘I don’t think it’s at all a pity. I said
“What for?”’

‘She boxed the Queen’s ears--’ the Rabbit began. Alice gave a little
scream of laughter. ‘Oh, hush!’ the Rabbit whispered in a frightened
tone. ‘The Queen will hear you! You see, she came rather late, and the
Queen said--’

‘Get to your places!’ shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and
people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each
other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game
began. Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in
her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs,
the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves
up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo:
she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under
her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got
its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a
blow with its head, it WOULD twist itself round and look up in her face,
with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out
laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin
again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled
itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was
generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send the
hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always getting up
and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon came to the
conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.

The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling
all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short
time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and
shouting ‘Off with his head!’ or ‘Off with her head!’ about once in a
minute.

Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any
dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute,
‘and then,’ thought she, ‘what would become of me? They’re dreadfully
fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there’s any one
left alive!’

She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she
could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance
in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching it
a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself
‘It’s the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk to.’

‘How are you getting on?’ said the Cat, as soon as there was mouth
enough for it to speak with.

Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. ‘It’s no use
speaking to it,’ she thought, ‘till its ears have come, or at least one
of them.’ In another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put
down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad
she had someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that there was
enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.

‘I don’t think they play at all fairly,’ Alice began, in rather a
complaining tone, ‘and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can’t hear
oneself speak--and they don’t seem to have any rules in particular;
at least, if there are, nobody attends to them--and you’ve no idea how
confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there’s the
arch I’ve got to go through next walking about at the other end of the
ground--and I should have croqueted the Queen’s hedgehog just now, only
it ran away when it saw mine coming!’

‘How do you like the Queen?’ said the Cat in a low voice.

‘Not at all,’ said Alice: ‘she’s so extremely--’ Just then she noticed
that the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on,
‘--likely to win, that it’s hardly worth while finishing the game.’

The Queen smiled and passed on.

‘Who ARE you talking to?’ said the King, going up to Alice, and looking
at the Cat’s head with great curiosity.

‘It’s a friend of mine--a Cheshire Cat,’ said Alice: ‘allow me to
introduce it.’

‘I don’t like the look of it at all,’ said the King: ‘however, it may
kiss my hand if it likes.’

‘I’d rather not,’ the Cat remarked.

‘Don’t be impertinent,’ said the King, ‘and don’t look at me like that!’
He got behind Alice as he spoke.

‘A cat may look at a king,’ said Alice. ‘I’ve read that in some book,
but I don’t remember where.’

‘Well, it must be removed,’ said the King very decidedly, and he called
the Queen, who was passing at the moment, ‘My dear! I wish you would
have this cat removed!’

The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small.
‘Off with his head!’ she said, without even looking round.

‘I’ll fetch the executioner myself,’ said the King eagerly, and he
hurried off.

Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going
on, as she heard the Queen’s voice in the distance, screaming with
passion. She had already heard her sentence three of the players to be
executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look
of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew
whether it was her turn or not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.

The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed
to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the
other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the
other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a helpless
sort of way to fly up into a tree.

By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight
was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: ‘but it doesn’t
matter much,’ thought Alice, ‘as all the arches are gone from this side
of the ground.’ So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not
escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her
friend.

When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite a
large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between
the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once,
while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.

The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle
the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they
all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly
what they said.

The executioner’s argument was, that you couldn’t cut off a head unless
there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a
thing before, and he wasn’t going to begin at HIS time of life.

The King’s argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you weren’t to talk nonsense.

The Queen’s argument was, that if something wasn’t done about it in less
than no time she’d have everybody executed, all round. (It was this last
remark that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.)

Alice could think of nothing else to say but ‘It belongs to the Duchess:
you’d better ask HER about it.’

‘She’s in prison,’ the Queen said to the executioner: ‘fetch her here.’
And the executioner went off like an arrow.

 The Cat’s head began fading away the moment he was gone, and,
by the time he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely
disappeared; so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and down
looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.




CHAPTER IX. The Mock Turtle’s Story

‘You can’t think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!’
said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice’s, and
they walked off together.

Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought
to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so
savage when they met in the kitchen.

‘When I’M a Duchess,’ she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful tone
though), ‘I won’t have any pepper in my kitchen AT ALL. Soup does very
well without--Maybe it’s always pepper that makes people hot-tempered,’
she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind of
rule, ‘and vinegar that makes them sour--and camomile that makes
them bitter--and--and barley-sugar and such things that make children
sweet-tempered. I only wish people knew that: then they wouldn’t be so
stingy about it, you know--’

She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a little
startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. ‘You’re thinking
about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. I can’t
tell you just now what the moral of that is, but I shall remember it in
a bit.’

‘Perhaps it hasn’t one,’ Alice ventured to remark.

‘Tut, tut, child!’ said the Duchess. ‘Everything’s got a moral, if only
you can find it.’ And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice’s side as
she spoke.

Alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the
Duchess was VERY ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the
right height to rest her chin upon Alice’s shoulder, and it was an
uncomfortably sharp chin. However, she did not like to be rude, so she
bore it as well as she could.

‘The game’s going on rather better now,’ she said, by way of keeping up
the conversation a little.

‘’Tis so,’ said the Duchess: ‘and the moral of that is--“Oh, ‘tis love,
‘tis love, that makes the world go round!”’

‘Somebody said,’ Alice whispered, ‘that it’s done by everybody minding
their own business!’

‘Ah, well! It means much the same thing,’ said the Duchess, digging her
sharp little chin into Alice’s shoulder as she added, ‘and the moral
of THAT is--“Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of
themselves.”’

‘How fond she is of finding morals in things!’ Alice thought to herself.

‘I dare say you’re wondering why I don’t put my arm round your waist,’
the Duchess said after a pause: ‘the reason is, that I’m doubtful about
the temper of your flamingo. Shall I try the experiment?’

‘HE might bite,’ Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious to
have the experiment tried.

‘Very true,’ said the Duchess: ‘flamingoes and mustard both bite. And
the moral of that is--“Birds of a feather flock together.”’

‘Only mustard isn’t a bird,’ Alice remarked.

‘Right, as usual,’ said the Duchess: ‘what a clear way you have of
putting things!’

‘It’s a mineral, I THINK,’ said Alice.

‘Of course it is,’ said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree to
everything that Alice said; ‘there’s a large mustard-mine near here. And
the moral of that is--“The more there is of mine, the less there is of
yours.”’

‘Oh, I know!’ exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this last remark,
‘it’s a vegetable. It doesn’t look like one, but it is.’

‘I quite agree with you,’ said the Duchess; ‘and the moral of that
is--“Be what you would seem to be”--or if you’d like it put more
simply--“Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might
appear to others that what you were or might have been was not otherwise
than what you had been would have appeared to them to be otherwise.”’

‘I think I should understand that better,’ Alice said very politely, ‘if
I had it written down: but I can’t quite follow it as you say it.’

‘That’s nothing to what I could say if I chose,’ the Duchess replied, in
a pleased tone.

‘Pray don’t trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,’ said
Alice.

‘Oh, don’t talk about trouble!’ said the Duchess. ‘I make you a present
of everything I’ve said as yet.’

‘A cheap sort of present!’ thought Alice. ‘I’m glad they don’t give
birthday presents like that!’ But she did not venture to say it out
loud.

‘Thinking again?’ the Duchess asked, with another dig of her sharp
little chin.

‘I’ve a right to think,’ said Alice sharply, for she was beginning to
feel a little worried.

‘Just about as much right,’ said the Duchess, ‘as pigs have to fly; and
the m--’

But here, to Alice’s great surprise, the Duchess’s voice died away, even
in the middle of her favourite word ‘moral,’ and the arm that was linked
into hers began to tremble. Alice looked up, and there stood the Queen
in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm.

‘A fine day, your Majesty!’ the Duchess began in a low, weak voice.

‘Now, I give you fair warning,’ shouted the Queen, stamping on the
ground as she spoke; ‘either you or your head must be off, and that in
about half no time! Take your choice!’

The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.

‘Let’s go on with the game,’ the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was
too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the
croquet-ground.

The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen’s absence, and were
resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried
back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a moment’s delay would
cost them their lives.

All the time they were playing the Queen never left off quarrelling with
the other players, and shouting ‘Off with his head!’ or ‘Off with her
head!’ Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the soldiers,
who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that by
the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the
players, except the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and
under sentence of execution.

Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice, ‘Have
you seen the Mock Turtle yet?’

‘No,’ said Alice. ‘I don’t even know what a Mock Turtle is.’

‘It’s the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,’ said the Queen.

‘I never saw one, or heard of one,’ said Alice.

‘Come on, then,’ said the Queen, ‘and he shall tell you his history,’

As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low voice,
to the company generally, ‘You are all pardoned.’ ‘Come, THAT’S a good
thing!’ she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the
number of executions the Queen had ordered.

They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun.
(IF you don’t know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) ‘Up, lazy
thing!’ said the Queen, ‘and take this young lady to see the Mock
Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and see after some
executions I have ordered’; and she walked off, leaving Alice alone with
the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look of the creature, but on
the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to go
after that savage Queen: so she waited.

The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen till
she was out of sight: then it chuckled. ‘What fun!’ said the Gryphon,
half to itself, half to Alice.

‘What IS the fun?’ said Alice.

‘Why, SHE,’ said the Gryphon. ‘It’s all her fancy, that: they never
executes nobody, you know. Come on!’

‘Everybody says “come on!” here,’ thought Alice, as she went slowly
after it: ‘I never was so ordered about in all my life, never!’

They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance,
sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came
nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. She
pitied him deeply. ‘What is his sorrow?’ she asked the Gryphon, and the
Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, ‘It’s all his
fancy, that: he hasn’t got no sorrow, you know. Come on!’

So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with large eyes
full of tears, but said nothing.

‘This here young lady,’ said the Gryphon, ‘she wants for to know your
history, she do.’

‘I’ll tell it her,’ said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone: ‘sit
down, both of you, and don’t speak a word till I’ve finished.’

So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice thought to
herself, ‘I don’t see how he can EVEN finish, if he doesn’t begin.’ But
she waited patiently.

‘Once,’ said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, ‘I was a real
Turtle.’

These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an
occasional exclamation of ‘Hjckrrh!’ from the Gryphon, and the constant
heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly getting up and
saying, ‘Thank you, sir, for your interesting story,’ but she could
not help thinking there MUST be more to come, so she sat still and said
nothing.

‘When we were little,’ the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly,
though still sobbing a little now and then, ‘we went to school in the
sea. The master was an old Turtle--we used to call him Tortoise--’

‘Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn’t one?’ Alice asked.

‘We called him Tortoise because he taught us,’ said the Mock Turtle
angrily: ‘really you are very dull!’

‘You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question,’
added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked at poor
Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At last the Gryphon said
to the Mock Turtle, ‘Drive on, old fellow! Don’t be all day about it!’
and he went on in these words:

‘Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn’t believe it--’

‘I never said I didn’t!’ interrupted Alice.

‘You did,’ said the Mock Turtle.

‘Hold your tongue!’ added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak again.
The Mock Turtle went on.

‘We had the best of educations--in fact, we went to school every day--’

‘I’VE been to a day-school, too,’ said Alice; ‘you needn’t be so proud
as all that.’

‘With extras?’ asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

‘Yes,’ said Alice, ‘we learned French and music.’

‘And washing?’ said the Mock Turtle.

‘Certainly not!’ said Alice indignantly.

‘Ah! then yours wasn’t a really good school,’ said the Mock Turtle in
a tone of great relief. ‘Now at OURS they had at the end of the bill,
“French, music, AND WASHING--extra.”’

‘You couldn’t have wanted it much,’ said Alice; ‘living at the bottom of
the sea.’

‘I couldn’t afford to learn it.’ said the Mock Turtle with a sigh. ‘I
only took the regular course.’

‘What was that?’ inquired Alice.

‘Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,’ the Mock Turtle
replied; ‘and then the different branches of Arithmetic--Ambition,
Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.’

‘I never heard of “Uglification,”’ Alice ventured to say. ‘What is it?’

The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. ‘What! Never heard of
uglifying!’ it exclaimed. ‘You know what to beautify is, I suppose?’

‘Yes,’ said Alice doubtfully: ‘it means--to--make--anything--prettier.’

‘Well, then,’ the Gryphon went on, ‘if you don’t know what to uglify is,
you ARE a simpleton.’

Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so she
turned to the Mock Turtle, and said ‘What else had you to learn?’

‘Well, there was Mystery,’ the Mock Turtle replied, counting off
the subjects on his flappers, ‘--Mystery, ancient and modern, with
Seaography: then Drawling--the Drawling-master was an old conger-eel,
that used to come once a week: HE taught us Drawling, Stretching, and
Fainting in Coils.’

‘What was THAT like?’ said Alice.

‘Well, I can’t show it you myself,’ the Mock Turtle said: ‘I’m too
stiff. And the Gryphon never learnt it.’

‘Hadn’t time,’ said the Gryphon: ‘I went to the Classics master, though.
He was an old crab, HE was.’

‘I never went to him,’ the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: ‘he taught
Laughing and Grief, they used to say.’

‘So he did, so he did,’ said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both
creatures hid their faces in their paws.

‘And how many hours a day did you do lessons?’ said Alice, in a hurry to
change the subject.

‘Ten hours the first day,’ said the Mock Turtle: ‘nine the next, and so
on.’

‘What a curious plan!’ exclaimed Alice.

‘That’s the reason they’re called lessons,’ the Gryphon remarked:
‘because they lessen from day to day.’

This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a little
before she made her next remark. ‘Then the eleventh day must have been a
holiday?’

‘Of course it was,’ said the Mock Turtle.

‘And how did you manage on the twelfth?’ Alice went on eagerly.

‘That’s enough about lessons,’ the Gryphon interrupted in a very decided
tone: ‘tell her something about the games now.’




CHAPTER X. The Lobster Quadrille

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across
his eyes. He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or
two sobs choked his voice. ‘Same as if he had a bone in his throat,’
said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in
the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears
running down his cheeks, he went on again:--

‘You may not have lived much under the sea--’ [‘I haven’t,’ said
Alice)--‘and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster--’
(Alice began to say ‘I once tasted--’ but checked herself hastily, and
said ‘No, never’) ‘--so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a
Lobster Quadrille is!’

‘No, indeed,’ said Alice. ‘What sort of a dance is it?’

‘Why,’ said the Gryphon, ‘you first form into a line along the
sea-shore--’

‘Two lines!’ cried the Mock Turtle. ‘Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on;
then, when you’ve cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way--’

‘THAT generally takes some time,’ interrupted the Gryphon.

‘--you advance twice--’

‘Each with a lobster as a partner!’ cried the Gryphon.

‘Of course,’ the Mock Turtle said: ‘advance twice, set to partners--’

‘--change lobsters, and retire in same order,’ continued the Gryphon.

‘Then, you know,’ the Mock Turtle went on, ‘you throw the--’

‘The lobsters!’ shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

‘--as far out to sea as you can--’

‘Swim after them!’ screamed the Gryphon.

‘Turn a somersault in the sea!’ cried the Mock Turtle, capering wildly
about.

‘Change lobsters again!’ yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.

‘Back to land again, and that’s all the first figure,’ said the Mock
Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had been
jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadly
and quietly, and looked at Alice.

‘It must be a very pretty dance,’ said Alice timidly.

‘Would you like to see a little of it?’ said the Mock Turtle.

‘Very much indeed,’ said Alice.

‘Come, let’s try the first figure!’ said the Mock Turtle to the Gryphon.
‘We can do without lobsters, you know. Which shall sing?’

‘Oh, YOU sing,’ said the Gryphon. ‘I’ve forgotten the words.’

So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now and
then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their
forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly
and sadly:--

 ‘“Will you walk a little faster?” said a whiting to a snail.
 “There’s a porpoise close behind us, and he’s treading on my tail.

 See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
 They are waiting on the shingle--will you come and join the dance?

 Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, will you join the dance?
 Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance?

 “You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
 When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!”
  But the snail replied “Too far, too far!” and gave a look askance--
 Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.

 Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
 Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.

 ‘“What matters it how far we go?” his scaly friend replied.
 “There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
 The further off from England the nearer is to France--
 Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.

 Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, will you join the dance?
 Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance?”’

‘Thank you, it’s a very interesting dance to watch,’ said Alice, feeling
very glad that it was over at last: ‘and I do so like that curious song
about the whiting!’

‘Oh, as to the whiting,’ said the Mock Turtle, ‘they--you’ve seen them,
of course?’

‘Yes,’ said Alice, ‘I’ve often seen them at dinn--’ she checked herself
hastily.

‘I don’t know where Dinn may be,’ said the Mock Turtle, ‘but if you’ve
seen them so often, of course you know what they’re like.’

‘I believe so,’ Alice replied thoughtfully. ‘They have their tails in
their mouths--and they’re all over crumbs.’

‘You’re wrong about the crumbs,’ said the Mock Turtle: ‘crumbs would all
wash off in the sea. But they HAVE their tails in their mouths; and the
reason is--’ here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes.--‘Tell her
about the reason and all that,’ he said to the Gryphon.

‘The reason is,’ said the Gryphon, ‘that they WOULD go with the lobsters
to the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So they had to fall a long
way. So they got their tails fast in their mouths. So they couldn’t get
them out again. That’s all.’

‘Thank you,’ said Alice, ‘it’s very interesting. I never knew so much
about a whiting before.’

‘I can tell you more than that, if you like,’ said the Gryphon. ‘Do you
know why it’s called a whiting?’

‘I never thought about it,’ said Alice. ‘Why?’

‘IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES.’ the Gryphon replied very solemnly.

Alice was thoroughly puzzled. ‘Does the boots and shoes!’ she repeated
in a wondering tone.

‘Why, what are YOUR shoes done with?’ said the Gryphon. ‘I mean, what
makes them so shiny?’

Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her
answer. ‘They’re done with blacking, I believe.’

‘Boots and shoes under the sea,’ the Gryphon went on in a deep voice,
‘are done with a whiting. Now you know.’

‘And what are they made of?’ Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.

‘Soles and eels, of course,’ the Gryphon replied rather impatiently:
‘any shrimp could have told you that.’

‘If I’d been the whiting,’ said Alice, whose thoughts were still running
on the song, ‘I’d have said to the porpoise, “Keep back, please: we
don’t want YOU with us!”’

‘They were obliged to have him with them,’ the Mock Turtle said: ‘no
wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.’

‘Wouldn’t it really?’ said Alice in a tone of great surprise.

‘Of course not,’ said the Mock Turtle: ‘why, if a fish came to ME, and
told me he was going a journey, I should say “With what porpoise?”’

‘Don’t you mean “purpose”?’ said Alice.

‘I mean what I say,’ the Mock Turtle replied in an offended tone. And
the Gryphon added ‘Come, let’s hear some of YOUR adventures.’

‘I could tell you my adventures--beginning from this morning,’ said
Alice a little timidly: ‘but it’s no use going back to yesterday,
because I was a different person then.’

‘Explain all that,’ said the Mock Turtle.

‘No, no! The adventures first,’ said the Gryphon in an impatient tone:
‘explanations take such a dreadful time.’

So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first
saw the White Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it just at first,
the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened
their eyes and mouths so VERY wide, but she gained courage as she went
on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part about
her repeating ‘YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,’ to the Caterpillar, and the
words all coming different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath,
and said ‘That’s very curious.’

‘It’s all about as curious as it can be,’ said the Gryphon.

‘It all came different!’ the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. ‘I
should like to hear her try and repeat something now. Tell her to
begin.’ He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of
authority over Alice.

‘Stand up and repeat “‘TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD,”’ said the
Gryphon.

‘How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!’
thought Alice; ‘I might as well be at school at once.’ However, she
got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the Lobster
Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came
very queer indeed:--

  ‘’Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare,
  “You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair.”
   As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
  Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.’

       [later editions continued as follows
  When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
  And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark,
  But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
  His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.]

‘That’s different from what I used to say when I was a child,’ said the
Gryphon.

‘Well, I never heard it before,’ said the Mock Turtle; ‘but it sounds
uncommon nonsense.’

Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands,
wondering if anything would EVER happen in a natural way again.

‘I should like to have it explained,’ said the Mock Turtle.

‘She can’t explain it,’ said the Gryphon hastily. ‘Go on with the next
verse.’

‘But about his toes?’ the Mock Turtle persisted. ‘How COULD he turn them
out with his nose, you know?’

‘It’s the first position in dancing.’ Alice said; but was dreadfully
puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject.

‘Go on with the next verse,’ the Gryphon repeated impatiently: ‘it
begins “I passed by his garden.”’

Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come
wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:--

  ‘I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
  How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie--’

    [later editions continued as follows
  The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
  While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
  When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon,
  Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
  While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
  And concluded the banquet--]

‘What IS the use of repeating all that stuff,’ the Mock Turtle
interrupted, ‘if you don’t explain it as you go on? It’s by far the most
confusing thing I ever heard!’

‘Yes, I think you’d better leave off,’ said the Gryphon: and Alice was
only too glad to do so.

‘Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?’ the Gryphon went
on. ‘Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song?’

‘Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,’ Alice
replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone,
‘Hm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her “Turtle Soup,” will you, old
fellow?’

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked
with sobs, to sing this:--

   ‘Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
   Waiting in a hot tureen!
   Who for such dainties would not stoop?
   Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
   Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
   Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beautiful Soup!

   ‘Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish,
   Game, or any other dish?
   Who would not give all else for two
   Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
   Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
   Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beauti--FUL SOUP!’

‘Chorus again!’ cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just begun
to repeat it, when a cry of ‘The trial’s beginning!’ was heard in the
distance.

‘Come on!’ cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand, it hurried
off, without waiting for the end of the song.

‘What trial is it?’ Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only
answered ‘Come on!’ and ran the faster, while more and more faintly
came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:--

   ‘Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beautiful Soup!’




CHAPTER XI. Who Stole the Tarts?

The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when they
arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them--all sorts of little
birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave was
standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard
him; and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one hand,
and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the very middle of the court
was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so good,
that it made Alice quite hungry to look at them--‘I wish they’d get the
trial done,’ she thought, ‘and hand round the refreshments!’ But there
seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about
her, to pass away the time.

Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read
about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew
the name of nearly everything there. ‘That’s the judge,’ she said to
herself, ‘because of his great wig.’

The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown over the
wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he did
not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.

‘And that’s the jury-box,’ thought Alice, ‘and those twelve creatures,’
(she was obliged to say ‘creatures,’ you see, because some of them were
animals, and some were birds,) ‘I suppose they are the jurors.’ She said
this last word two or three times over to herself, being rather proud of
it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of her
age knew the meaning of it at all. However, ‘jury-men’ would have done
just as well.

The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. ‘What are they
doing?’ Alice whispered to the Gryphon. ‘They can’t have anything to put
down yet, before the trial’s begun.’

‘They’re putting down their names,’ the Gryphon whispered in reply, ‘for
fear they should forget them before the end of the trial.’

‘Stupid things!’ Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she stopped
hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, ‘Silence in the court!’ and the
King put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round, to make out who
was talking.

Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders,
that all the jurors were writing down ‘stupid things!’ on their slates,
and she could even make out that one of them didn’t know how to spell
‘stupid,’ and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. ‘A nice
muddle their slates’ll be in before the trial’s over!’ thought Alice.

One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This of course, Alice
could not stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and
very soon found an opportunity of taking it away. She did it so quickly
that the poor little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not make out
at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was
obliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this was
of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.

‘Herald, read the accusation!’ said the King.

On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and then
unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:--

   ‘The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
      All on a summer day:
    The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
      And took them quite away!’

‘Consider your verdict,’ the King said to the jury.

‘Not yet, not yet!’ the Rabbit hastily interrupted. ‘There’s a great
deal to come before that!’

‘Call the first witness,’ said the King; and the White Rabbit blew three
blasts on the trumpet, and called out, ‘First witness!’

The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a teacup in one
hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other. ‘I beg pardon, your
Majesty,’ he began, ‘for bringing these in: but I hadn’t quite finished
my tea when I was sent for.’

‘You ought to have finished,’ said the King. ‘When did you begin?’

The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into the
court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. ‘Fourteenth of March, I think it
was,’ he said.

‘Fifteenth,’ said the March Hare.

‘Sixteenth,’ added the Dormouse.

‘Write that down,’ the King said to the jury, and the jury eagerly
wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, and
reduced the answer to shillings and pence.

‘Take off your hat,’ the King said to the Hatter.

‘It isn’t mine,’ said the Hatter.

‘Stolen!’ the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made a
memorandum of the fact.

‘I keep them to sell,’ the Hatter added as an explanation; ‘I’ve none of
my own. I’m a hatter.’

Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the Hatter,
who turned pale and fidgeted.

‘Give your evidence,’ said the King; ‘and don’t be nervous, or I’ll have
you executed on the spot.’

This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting
from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and in
his confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the
bread-and-butter.

Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled
her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to
grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave
the court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was as
long as there was room for her.

‘I wish you wouldn’t squeeze so.’ said the Dormouse, who was sitting
next to her. ‘I can hardly breathe.’

‘I can’t help it,’ said Alice very meekly: ‘I’m growing.’

‘You’ve no right to grow here,’ said the Dormouse.

‘Don’t talk nonsense,’ said Alice more boldly: ‘you know you’re growing
too.’

‘Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace,’ said the Dormouse: ‘not in that
ridiculous fashion.’ And he got up very sulkily and crossed over to the
other side of the court.

All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the Hatter, and,
just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers
of the court, ‘Bring me the list of the singers in the last concert!’ on
which the wretched Hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.

‘Give your evidence,’ the King repeated angrily, ‘or I’ll have you
executed, whether you’re nervous or not.’

‘I’m a poor man, your Majesty,’ the Hatter began, in a trembling voice,
‘--and I hadn’t begun my tea--not above a week or so--and what with the
bread-and-butter getting so thin--and the twinkling of the tea--’

‘The twinkling of the what?’ said the King.

‘It began with the tea,’ the Hatter replied.

‘Of course twinkling begins with a T!’ said the King sharply. ‘Do you
take me for a dunce? Go on!’

‘I’m a poor man,’ the Hatter went on, ‘and most things twinkled after
that--only the March Hare said--’

‘I didn’t!’ the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.

‘You did!’ said the Hatter.

‘I deny it!’ said the March Hare.

‘He denies it,’ said the King: ‘leave out that part.’

‘Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said--’ the Hatter went on, looking
anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse denied
nothing, being fast asleep.

‘After that,’ continued the Hatter, ‘I cut some more bread-and-butter--’

‘But what did the Dormouse say?’ one of the jury asked.

‘That I can’t remember,’ said the Hatter.

‘You MUST remember,’ remarked the King, ‘or I’ll have you executed.’

The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, and went
down on one knee. ‘I’m a poor man, your Majesty,’ he began.

‘You’re a very poor speaker,’ said the King.

Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by
the officers of the court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will just
explain to you how it was done. They had a large canvas bag, which tied
up at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig,
head first, and then sat upon it.)

‘I’m glad I’ve seen that done,’ thought Alice. ‘I’ve so often read
in the newspapers, at the end of trials, “There was some attempts
at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the officers of the
court,” and I never understood what it meant till now.’

‘If that’s all you know about it, you may stand down,’ continued the
King.

‘I can’t go no lower,’ said the Hatter: ‘I’m on the floor, as it is.’

‘Then you may SIT down,’ the King replied.

Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.

‘Come, that finished the guinea-pigs!’ thought Alice. ‘Now we shall get
on better.’

‘I’d rather finish my tea,’ said the Hatter, with an anxious look at the
Queen, who was reading the list of singers.

‘You may go,’ said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the court,
without even waiting to put his shoes on.

‘--and just take his head off outside,’ the Queen added to one of the
officers: but the Hatter was out of sight before the officer could get
to the door.

‘Call the next witness!’ said the King.

The next witness was the Duchess’s cook. She carried the pepper-box in
her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the
court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.

‘Give your evidence,’ said the King.

‘Shan’t,’ said the cook.

The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a low voice,
‘Your Majesty must cross-examine THIS witness.’

‘Well, if I must, I must,’ the King said, with a melancholy air, and,
after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were
nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, ‘What are tarts made of?’

‘Pepper, mostly,’ said the cook.

‘Treacle,’ said a sleepy voice behind her.

‘Collar that Dormouse,’ the Queen shrieked out. ‘Behead that Dormouse!
Turn that Dormouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with his
whiskers!’

For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the Dormouse
turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had
disappeared.

‘Never mind!’ said the King, with an air of great relief. ‘Call the next
witness.’ And he added in an undertone to the Queen, ‘Really, my dear,
YOU must cross-examine the next witness. It quite makes my forehead
ache!’

Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling very
curious to see what the next witness would be like, ‘--for they haven’t
got much evidence YET,’ she said to herself. Imagine her surprise, when
the White Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, the
name ‘Alice!’




CHAPTER XII. Alice’s Evidence


‘Here!’ cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how
large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such
a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt,
upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there
they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of goldfish
she had accidentally upset the week before.

‘Oh, I BEG your pardon!’ she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and
began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident of
the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea
that they must be collected at once and put back into the jury-box, or
they would die.

‘The trial cannot proceed,’ said the King in a very grave voice, ‘until
all the jurymen are back in their proper places--ALL,’ he repeated with
great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said do.

Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put
the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its
tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. She soon got
it out again, and put it right; ‘not that it signifies much,’ she said
to herself; ‘I should think it would be QUITE as much use in the trial
one way up as the other.’

As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being
upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to
them, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the
accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do
anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of the
court.

‘What do you know about this business?’ the King said to Alice.

‘Nothing,’ said Alice.

‘Nothing WHATEVER?’ persisted the King.

‘Nothing whatever,’ said Alice.

‘That’s very important,’ the King said, turning to the jury. They were
just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White Rabbit
interrupted: ‘UNimportant, your Majesty means, of course,’ he said in a
very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as he spoke.

‘UNimportant, of course, I meant,’ the King hastily said, and went on
to himself in an undertone,

‘important--unimportant--unimportant--important--’ as if he were trying
which word sounded best.

Some of the jury wrote it down ‘important,’ and some ‘unimportant.’
Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates;
‘but it doesn’t matter a bit,’ she thought to herself.

At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in
his note-book, cackled out ‘Silence!’ and read out from his book, ‘Rule
Forty-two. ALL PERSONS MORE THAN A MILE HIGH TO LEAVE THE COURT.’

Everybody looked at Alice.

‘I’M not a mile high,’ said Alice.

‘You are,’ said the King.

‘Nearly two miles high,’ added the Queen.

‘Well, I shan’t go, at any rate,’ said Alice: ‘besides, that’s not a
regular rule: you invented it just now.’

‘It’s the oldest rule in the book,’ said the King.

‘Then it ought to be Number One,’ said Alice.

The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. ‘Consider your
verdict,’ he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.

‘There’s more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,’ said the White
Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; ‘this paper has just been picked
up.’

‘What’s in it?’ said the Queen.

‘I haven’t opened it yet,’ said the White Rabbit, ‘but it seems to be a
letter, written by the prisoner to--to somebody.’

‘It must have been that,’ said the King, ‘unless it was written to
nobody, which isn’t usual, you know.’

‘Who is it directed to?’ said one of the jurymen.

‘It isn’t directed at all,’ said the White Rabbit; ‘in fact, there’s
nothing written on the OUTSIDE.’ He unfolded the paper as he spoke, and
added ‘It isn’t a letter, after all: it’s a set of verses.’

‘Are they in the prisoner’s handwriting?’ asked another of the jurymen.

‘No, they’re not,’ said the White Rabbit, ‘and that’s the queerest thing
about it.’ (The jury all looked puzzled.)

‘He must have imitated somebody else’s hand,’ said the King. (The jury
all brightened up again.)

‘Please your Majesty,’ said the Knave, ‘I didn’t write it, and they
can’t prove I did: there’s no name signed at the end.’

‘If you didn’t sign it,’ said the King, ‘that only makes the matter
worse. You MUST have meant some mischief, or else you’d have signed your
name like an honest man.’

There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first really
clever thing the King had said that day.

‘That PROVES his guilt,’ said the Queen.

‘It proves nothing of the sort!’ said Alice. ‘Why, you don’t even know
what they’re about!’

‘Read them,’ said the King.

The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. ‘Where shall I begin, please
your Majesty?’ he asked.

‘Begin at the beginning,’ the King said gravely, ‘and go on till you
come to the end: then stop.’

These were the verses the White Rabbit read:--

   ‘They told me you had been to her,
    And mentioned me to him:
   She gave me a good character,
    But said I could not swim.

   He sent them word I had not gone
    (We know it to be true):
   If she should push the matter on,
    What would become of you?

   I gave her one, they gave him two,
    You gave us three or more;
   They all returned from him to you,
    Though they were mine before.

   If I or she should chance to be
    Involved in this affair,
   He trusts to you to set them free,
    Exactly as we were.

   My notion was that you had been
    (Before she had this fit)
   An obstacle that came between
    Him, and ourselves, and it.

   Don’t let him know she liked them best,
    For this must ever be
   A secret, kept from all the rest,
    Between yourself and me.’

‘That’s the most important piece of evidence we’ve heard yet,’ said the
King, rubbing his hands; ‘so now let the jury--’

‘If any one of them can explain it,’ said Alice, (she had grown so large
in the last few minutes that she wasn’t a bit afraid of interrupting
him,) ‘I’ll give him sixpence. _I_ don’t believe there’s an atom of
meaning in it.’

The jury all wrote down on their slates, ‘SHE doesn’t believe there’s an
atom of meaning in it,’ but none of them attempted to explain the paper.

‘If there’s no meaning in it,’ said the King, ‘that saves a world of
trouble, you know, as we needn’t try to find any. And yet I don’t know,’
he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at them
with one eye; ‘I seem to see some meaning in them, after all. “--SAID
I COULD NOT SWIM--” you can’t swim, can you?’ he added, turning to the
Knave.

The Knave shook his head sadly. ‘Do I look like it?’ he said. (Which he
certainly did NOT, being made entirely of cardboard.)

‘All right, so far,’ said the King, and he went on muttering over
the verses to himself: ‘“WE KNOW IT TO BE TRUE--” that’s the jury, of
course--“I GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWO--” why, that must be what he
did with the tarts, you know--’

‘But, it goes on “THEY ALL RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU,”’ said Alice.

‘Why, there they are!’ said the King triumphantly, pointing to the tarts
on the table. ‘Nothing can be clearer than THAT. Then again--“BEFORE SHE
HAD THIS FIT--” you never had fits, my dear, I think?’ he said to the
Queen.

‘Never!’ said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the Lizard
as she spoke. (The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his
slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily
began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as
it lasted.)

‘Then the words don’t FIT you,’ said the King, looking round the court
with a smile. There was a dead silence.

‘It’s a pun!’ the King added in an offended tone, and everybody laughed,
‘Let the jury consider their verdict,’ the King said, for about the
twentieth time that day.

‘No, no!’ said the Queen. ‘Sentence first--verdict afterwards.’

‘Stuff and nonsense!’ said Alice loudly. ‘The idea of having the
sentence first!’

‘Hold your tongue!’ said the Queen, turning purple.

‘I won’t!’ said Alice.

‘Off with her head!’ the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobody
moved.

‘Who cares for you?’ said Alice, (she had grown to her full size by this
time.) ‘You’re nothing but a pack of cards!’

At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon
her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and
tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her
head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead
leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.

‘Wake up, Alice dear!’ said her sister; ‘Why, what a long sleep you’ve
had!’

‘Oh, I’ve had such a curious dream!’ said Alice, and she told her
sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange Adventures
of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she had
finished, her sister kissed her, and said, ‘It WAS a curious dream,
dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it’s getting late.’ So
Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might,
what a wonderful dream it had been.

But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her
hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all her
wonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, and
this was her dream:--

First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the tiny
hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking
up into hers--she could hear the very tones of her voice, and see that
queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair that
WOULD always get into her eyes--and still as she listened, or seemed to
listen, the whole place around her became alive with the strange creatures
of her little sister’s dream.

The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by--the
frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool--she
could hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends
shared their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen
ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution--once more the pig-baby
was sneezing on the Duchess’s knee, while plates and dishes crashed
around it--once more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the
Lizard’s slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs,
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable Mock
Turtle.

So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in
Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all
would change to dull reality--the grass would be only rustling in the
wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds--the rattling
teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and the Queen’s shrill
cries to the voice of the shepherd boy--and the sneeze of the baby, the
shriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change (she
knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard--while the lowing
of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle’s
heavy sobs.

Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers
would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would
keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her
childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children, and
make THEIR eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps even
with the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with
all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys,
remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.

              THE END





End of Project Gutenberg’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALICE’S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND ***

***** This file should be named 11-0.txt or 11-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/11/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75910 ***




Transcriber’s Notes:

  Underscores “_” before and after a word or phrase indicate _italics_
    in the original text.
  Equal signs “=” before and after a word or phrase indicate =bold=
    in the original text.
  Small capitals have been converted to SOLID capitals.
  Illustrations have been moved so they do not break up paragraphs.
  Deprecated spellings have been preserved.
  Typographical and punctuation errors have been silently corrected.




                             ANCIENT
                               AND
                       MODERN ENGINEERING

                               AND
                       THE ISTHMIAN CANAL.

                               BY
                     WILLIAM H. BURR, C.E.,

     _Professor of Civil-Engineering in Columbia University;
    Member of the American Society of Civil Engineers and of
      the Institution of Civil Engineers of Great Britain._

                        _FIRST EDITION._
                         FIRST THOUSAND.

                            NEW YORK:
                       JOHN WILEY & SONS.
                LONDON: CHAPMAN & HALL, LIMITED.
                              1903.

                        Copyright, 1902,
                               BY
                         WILLIAM H. BURR

               ROBERT DRUMMOND, PRINTER, NEW YORK.




INTRODUCTION.


This book is the outcome of a course of six lectures delivered at the
Cooper Union in the city of New York in February and March, 1902,
under the auspices of Columbia University. It seemed desirable by the
President of the University that the subject-matter of the lectures
should be prepared for ultimate publication. The six Parts of the
book, therefore, comprise the substance of the six lectures, suitably
expanded for the purposes of publication.

It may be interesting to state that the half-tone illustrations
have, with scarcely an exception, been prepared from photographs of
the actual subjects illustrated. All such illustrations in Parts V
and VI devoted to the Nicaragua and Panama Canal routes are made
from photographs at the various locations by members of the force of
the Isthmian Canal Commission; they are, therefore, absolutely true
representations of the actual localities to which they apply.

For other illustrations the author wishes to express his indebtedness
to Messrs. G. P. Putnam’s Sons, Messrs. Turneaure and Russell, John
Wiley & Sons, The Morrison-Jewell Filtration Company, Mr. H. M. Sperry,
Signal Engineer, _The Engineering News_, _The Railroad Gazette_, The
American Society of Civil Engineers, The Standard Switch and Signal
Company, The Baldwin Locomotive Works, the American Locomotive Works,
Mr. Clemens Herschel, and the International Pump Company, and to
others from whom the author has received courtesies which he deeply
appreciates.

The classification or division of the matter of the text, and the table
of contents, have been made so complete, with a view to convenience
even of the desultory reader in seeking any particular subject or
paragraph, that no index has been prepared, as it is believed that the
table of contents, as arranged, practically supplies the information
ordinarily given by a comprehensive index.

Complete and detailed treatments of the purely technical matters
covered by Part II will be found in the author’s “Elasticity and
Resistance of Materials” and in his “Stresses in Bridge and Roof
Trusses, Arched Ribs and Suspension Bridges.”

                                                     W. H. B.

    COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY,
       October 24, 1902.




CONTENTS.


                                PART I.
                  _ANCIENT CIVIL-ENGINEERING WORKS._

                              CHAPTER I.
    ART.                                                            PAGE
     1. Introductory                                                   1
     2. Hydraulic Works of Chaldea and Egypt                           2
     3. Structural Works in Chaldea and Egypt                          4
     4. Ancient Maritime Commerce                                      7
     5. The Change of the Nile Channel at Memphis                      8
     6. The Pyramids                                                   8
     7. Obelisks, Labyrinths, and Temples                             12
     8. Nile Irrigation                                               13
     9. Prehistoric Bridge-building                                   14
    10. Ancient Brick-making                                          15
    11. Ancient Arches                                                16

                              CHAPTER II.
    12. The Beginnings of Engineering Works of Record                 19
    13. The Appian Way and other Roman Roads                          20
    14. Natural Advantages of Rome in Structural Stones               22
    15. Pozzuolana Hydraulic Cement                                   24
    16. Roman Bricks and Masonry                                      25
    17. Roman Building Laws                                           27
    18. Old Roman Walls                                               27
    19. The Servian Wall                                              28
    20. Old Roman Sewers                                              29
    21. Early Roman Bridges                                           31
    22. Bridge of Alcantara                                           35
    23. Military Bridges of the Romans                                35
    24. The Roman Arch                                                36

                             CHAPTER III.
    25. The Roman Water-supply                                        37
    26. The Roman Aqueducts                                           38
    27. Anio Vetus                                                    39
    28. Tepula                                                        40
    29. Virgo                                                         40
    30. Alsietina                                                     40
    31. Claudia                                                       41
    32. Anio Novus                                                    42
    33. Lengths and Dates of Aqueducts                                42
    34. Intakes and Settling-basins                                   43
    35. Delivery-tanks                                                44
    36. Leakage and Lining of Aqueducts                               44
    37. Grade of Aqueduct Channels                                    45
    38. Qualities of Roman Waters                                     46
    39. Combined Aqueducts                                            46
    40. Property Rights in Roman Waters                               46
    41. Ajutages and Unit of Measurement                              47
    42. The Stealing of Water                                         49
    43. Aqueduct Alignment and Design of Siphons                      49

                              CHAPTER IV.
    44. Antiquity of Masonry Aqueducts                                52
    45. Pont du Gard                                                  52
    46. Aqueducts at Segovia, Metz, and other Places                  53
    47. Tunnels                                                       54
    48. Ostia, the Harbor of Rome                                     56
    49. Harbors of Claudius and Trajan                                58

                              CHAPTER V.
    50. Ancient Engineering Science                                   60
    51. Ancient Views of the Physical Properties of Materials         61
    52. Roman Civil Engineers Searching for Water                     62
    53. Locating and Designing Conduits                               63
    54. Siphons                                                       64
    55. Healthful Sites for Cities                                    65
    56. Foundations of Structures                                     65
    57. Pozzuolana and Sand                                           66
    58. Lime Mortar                                                   66
    59. Roman Bricks according to Vitruvius                           66
    60. Roman Timber                                                  67
    61. The Rules of Vitruvius for Harbors                            67
    62. The Thrusts of Arches and Earth;
                       Retaining-walls and Pavements                  68
    63. The Professional Spirit of Vitruvius                          68
    64. Mechanical Appliances of the Ancients                         69
    65. Unlimited Forces and Time                                     69

                               PART II.
                              _BRIDGES._

                              CHAPTER VI.
    66. Introductory                                                  70
    67. First Cast-iron Arch                                          70
    68. Early Timber Bridges in America                               71
    69. Town Lattice Bridge                                           72
    70. Howe Truss                                                    74
    71. Pratt Truss                                                   76
    72. Squire Whipple’s Work                                         77
    73. Character of Work of Early Builders                           77

                             CHAPTER VII.
    74. Modern Bridge Theory                                          78
    75. The Stresses in Beams                                         79
    76. Vertical and Horizontal Shearing Stresses                     80
    77. Law of Variation of Stresses of Tension and Compression       82
    78. Fundamental Formulæ of Theory of Beams                        83
    79. Practical Applications                                        85
    80. Deflection                                                    86
    81. Bending Moments and Shears with Single Load                   87
    82. Bending Moments and Shears with any System of Loads           89
    83. Bending Moments and Shears with Uniform Loads                 92
    84. Greatest Shear for Uniform Moving Load                        94
    85. Bending Moments and Shears for Cantilever Beams               96
    86. Greatest Bending Moment with any System of Loading            97
    87. Applications to Rolled Beams                                  99

                             CHAPTER VIII.
     88. The Truss Element or Triangle of Bracing                    100
     89. Simple Trusses                                              101
     90. The Pratt Truss Type                                        102
     91. The Howe Truss Type                                         105
     92. The Simple Triangular Truss                                 106
     93. Through- and Deck-Bridges                                   108
     94. Multiple Systems of Triangulation                           108
     95. Influence of Mill and Shop Capacity on Length of Span       109
     96. Trusses with Broken or Inclined Chords                      109
     97. Position of any Moving Load for Greatest Webb Stress        110
     98. Application of Criterions for both Chord and Web Stresses   111
     99. Influence Lines                                             112
    100. Influence Lines for Moments both for Beams and Trusses      113
    101. Influence Lines for Shears both for Beams and Trusses       115
    102. Application of Influence-line Method to Trusses             118

                              CHAPTER IX.
    103. Lateral Wind Pressure on Trusses                            122
    104. Upper and Lower Lateral Bracing                             124
    105. Bridge Plans and Shopwork                                   125
    106. Erection of Bridges                                         126
    107. Statically Determinate Trusses                              126
    108. Continuous Beams and Trusses—Theorem of Three Moments       128
    109. Application to Draw- or Swing-bridges                       130
    110. Special Method for Deflection of Trusses                    130
    111. Application of Method for Deflection of Triangular Frame    133
    112. Application of Method for Deflection to Truss               134
    113. Method of Least Work                                        137
    114. Application of Method of Least Work to General Problem      138
    115. Application of Method of Least Work to Trussed Beam         139
    116. Removal of Indetermination by Methods of Least Work
                 and Deflection                                      141

                              CHAPTER X.
    117. The Arched Rib, of both Steel and Masonry                   142
    118. Arched Rib with Ends Fixed                                  144
    119. Arched Rib with Ends Jointed                                144
    120. Arched Rib with Crown and Ends Jointed                      145
    121. Relative Stiffness of Arched Ribs                           145
    122. General Conditions of Analysis of Arched Ribs               146

                              CHAPTER XI.
    123. Beams of Combined Steel and Concrete                        149

                             CHAPTER XII.
    124. The Masonry Arch                                            154
    125. Old and New Theories of the Arch                            155
    126. Stress Conditions in the Arch-ring                          158
    127. Applications to an Actual Arch                              158
    128. Intensities of Pressure in the Arch-ring                    162
    129. Permissible Working Pressures                               163
    130. Largest Arch Spans                                          163

                             CHAPTER XIII.
    131. Cantilever and Stiffened Suspension Bridges                 166
    132. Cantilever Bridges                                          166
    133. Stiffened Suspension Bridges                                168
    134. The Stiffening Truss                                        170
    135. Location and Arrangement of Stiffening Trusses              171
    136. Division of Load between Cables and Stiffening Truss        173
    137. Stresses in Cables and Moments and Shears in Trusses        174
    138. Thermal Stresses and Moments in Stiffened
                 Suspension Bridges                                  175
    139. Formation of the Cables                                     176
    140. Economical Limits of Spans                                  177

                               PART III.
                  _WATER-WORKS FOR CITIES AND TOWNS._

                             CHAPTER XIV.
    141. Introductory                                                179
    142. First Steam-pumps                                           180
    143. Water-supply of Paris and London                            181
    144. Early Water-pipes                                           181
    145. Earliest Water-supplies in the United States                182
    146. Quality and Uses of Public Water-supply                     182
    147. Amount of Public Water-supply                               183
    148. Increase of Daily Consumption and the Division
                  of that Consumption                                183
    149. Waste of Public Water                                       186
    150. Analysis of Reasonable Daily Supply per Head of Population  188
    151. Actual Daily Consumption in Cities of the United States     189
    152. Actual Daily Consumption in Foreign Cities                  191
    153. Variations in Rate of Daily Consumption                     192
    154. Supply of Fire-streams                                      193

                              CHAPTER XV.
    155. Waste of Water, Particularly in the City of New York        196
    156. Division of Daily Consumption in the City of New York       197
    157. Daily Domestic Consumption                                  198
    158. Incurable and Curable Wastes                                199
    159. Needless and Incurable Waste in City of New York            200
    160. Increase in Population                                      200
    161. Sources of Public Water-supplies                            202
    162. Rain-gauges and their Records                               204
    163. Elements of Annual and Monthly Rainfall                     204
    164. Hourly or Less Rates of Rainfall                            207
    165. Extent of Heavy Rain-storms                                 207
    166. Provision for Low Rainfall Years                            208
    167. Available Portion of Rainfall or Run-off of Watersheds      209
    168. Run-off of Sudbury Watershed                                211
    169. Run-off of Croton Watershed                                 211
    170. Evaporation from Reservoirs                                 213
    171. Evaporation from the Earth’s Surface                        215

                             CHAPTER XVI.
    172. Application of Fitzgerald’s Results to the Croton Watershed 216
    173. The Capacity of the Croton Watershed                        217
    174. Necessary Storage for New York Supply to Compensate
                           for Deficiency                            218
    175. No Exact Rule for Storage Capacity                          220
    176. The Color of Water                                          221
    177. Stripping Reservoir Sites                                   222
    178. Average Depth of Reservoirs should be as
                          Great as Practicable                       224
    179. Overturn of Contents of Reservoirs Due to
                     Seasonal Changes of Temperature                 224
    180. The Construction of Reservoirs                              225
    181. Gate-houses, and Pipe-lines in Embankments                  229
    182. High Masonry Dams                                           230

                             CHAPTER XVII.
    183. Gravity Supplies                                            234
    184. Masonry Conduits                                            234
    185. Metal Conduits                                              236
    186. General Formula for Discharge of Conduits—Chezy’s Formula   237
    187. Kutter’s Formula                                            239
    188. Hydraulic Gradient                                          241
    189. Flow of Water in Large Masonry Conduits                     244
    190. Flow of Water through Large Closed Pipes                    245
    191. Change of Hydraulic Gradient by Changing Diameter of Pip    250
    192. Control of Flow by Gates at Upper End of Pipe-line          251
    193. Flow in Old and New Cast-iron Pipes—Tubercles               251
    194. Timber-stave Pipes                                          253

                            CHAPTER XVIII.
    195. Pumping and Pumps                                           254
    196. Resistances of Pumps and Main—Dynamic Head                  258
    197. Duty of Pumping-engines                                     260
    198. Data to be Observed in Pumping-engine Tests                 261
    199. Basis of Computations for Duty                              262
    200. Heat-units and Ash in 100 Pounds of Coal,
                    and Amount of Work Equivalent to a Heat-unit     262
    201. Three Methods of Estimating Duty                            265
    202. Trial Test and Duty of Allis Pumping-engine                 265
    203. Conditions Affecting Duty of Pumping-engines                266
    204. Speeds and Duties of Modern Pumping-engines                 266

                             CHAPTER XIX.
    205. Distributing-reservoirs and their Capacities                267
    206. System of Distributing Mains and Pipes                      268
    207. Diameters of and Velocities in Distributing Mains and Pipes 269
    208. Required Pressures in Mains and Pipes                       270
    209. Fire-hydrants                                               270
    210. Elements of Distributing Systems                            270

                              CHAPTER XX.
    211. Sanitary Improvement of Public Water-supplies               276
    212. Improvement by Sedimentation                                277
    213. Sedimentation Aided by Chemicals                            279
    214. Amount of Solid Matter Removed by Sedimentation             279
    215. Two Methods of Operating Sedimentation-basins               279
    216. Sizes and Construction of Settling-basins                   280
    217. Two Methods of Filtration                                   281
    218. Conditions Necessary for Reduction of Organic Matter        282
    219. Slow Filtration through Sand—Intermittent Filtration        283
    220. Removal of Bacteria in the Filter                           286
    221. Preliminary Treatment—Sizes of Sand Grains                  286
    222. Most Effective Sizes of Sand Grains                         288
    223. Air and Water Capacities                                    288
    224. Bacterial Efficiency and Purification—Hygienic Efficiency   290
    225. Bacterial Activity near Top of Filter                       290
    226. Rate of Filtration                                          291
    227. Effective Head on Filter                                    291
    228. Constant Rate of Filtration Necessary                       292
    229. Scraping of Filters                                         293
    230. Introduction of Water to Intermittent Filters               294
    231. Effect of Low Temperature                                   294
    232. Choice of Intermittent or Continuous Filtration             294
    233. Size and Arrangement of Slow Sand Filters                   295
    234. Design of Filter-beds                                       296
    235. Covered Filters                                             299
    236. Clear-water Drain-pipes of Filters                          299
    237. Arrangement of the Sand at Lawrence and Albany              300
    238. Velocity of Flow through Sand                               302
    239. Frequency of Scraping and Amount Filtered between Scrapings 303
    240. Cleaning the Clogged Sand                                   303
    241. Controlling or Regulating Apparatus                         305
    242. Cost of Slow Sand Filters                                   307
    243. Cost of Operation of Albany Filter                          308
    244. Operation and Cost of Operation of Lawrence Filter          309
    245. Sanitary Results of Operation of Lawrence
                          and Albany Filters                         310
    246. Rapid Filtration with Coagulants                            311
    247. Operation of Coagulants                                     312
    248. Principal Parts of Mechanical Filter-plant—Coagulation
                   and Subsidence                                    313
    249. Amount of Coagulant—Advantageous Effect of Alum
                on Organic Matter                                    314
    250. High Heads and Rates for Rapid Filtration                   315
    251. Types and General Arrangement of Mechanical Filters         316
    252. Cost of Mechanical Filters                                  318
    253. Relative Features of Slow and Rapid Filtration              318

                               PART IV.
               _SOME FEATURES OF RAILROAD ENGINEERING._

                             CHAPTER XXI.
    254. Introductory                                                320
    255. Train Resistances                                           322
    256. Grades                                                      322
    257. Curves                                                      324
    258. Resistance of Curves and Compensation in Grades             324
    259. Transition Curves                                           325
    260. Road-bed, including Ties                                    327
    261. Mountain Locations of Railroad Lines                        328
    262. The Georgetown Loop                                         331
    263. Tunnel-loop Location, Rhætian Railways, Switzerland         331

                             CHAPTER XXII.
    264. Railroad Signalling                                         335
    265. The Pilot Guard                                             335
    266. The Train-Staff                                             335
    267. First Basis of Railroad Signalling                          336
    268. Code of American Railway Association                        337
    268_a_. The Block                                                338
    269. Three Classes of Railroad Signals                           338
    270. The Banner Signal                                           338
    271. The Semaphore                                               340
    272. Colors for Signalling                                       340
    273. Indications of the Semaphore                                341
    274. General Character of Block System                           342
    275. Block Systems in Use                                        343
    276. Locations of Signals                                        344
    277. Home, Distant, and Advance Signals                          344
    278. Typical Working of Auto-controlled Manual System            345
    279. General Results                                             348
    280. Distant Signals                                             349
    281. Function of Advance Signals                                 349
    282. Signalling at a Single-track Crossing                       350
    283. Signalling at a Double-track Crossing                       352
    284. Signalling for Double-track Junction and Cross-over         352
    285. General Observations                                        353
    286. Interlocking-machines                                       354
    287. Methods of Applying Power in Systems of Signalling          357
    288. Train-staff Signalling                                      358

                            CHAPTER XXIII.
    289. Evolution of the Locomotive                                 363
    290. Increase of Locomotive Weight and Rate
                  of Combustion of Fuel                              365
    291. Principal Parts of a Modern Locomotive                      366
    292. The Wootten Fire-box and Boiler                             367
    293. Locomotives with Wootten Boilers                            370
    294. Recent Improvements in Locomotive Design                    372
    295. Compound Locomotives with Tandem Cylinders                  373
    296. Evaporative Efficiency of Different Rates of Combustion     375
    296_a_. Tractive Force of a Locomotive                           376
    297. Central Atlantic Type of Locomotive                         378
    298. Consolidation Engine, N. Y. C. & H. R. R. R.                379
    299. P., B. & L. E. Consolidation Engine                         380
    300. L. S. & M. S. Fast Passenger Engine                         381
    301. Northern Pacific Tandem Compound Locomotive                 382
    302. Union Pacific Vauclain Compound Locomotive                  384
    303. Southern Pacific Mogul with Vanderbilt Boiler               384
    304. The “Soo” Decapod Locomotive                                385
    305. The A., T. & S. F. Decapod, the Heaviest Locomotive
                                     yet Built                       386
    306. Comparison of Some of the Heaviest Locomotives in Use       389

                                PART V.
                _THE NICARAGUA ROUTE FOR A SHIP-CANAL._

    307. Feasibility of Nicaragua Route                              390
    308. Discovery of Lake Nicaragua                                 390
    309. Early Maritime Commerce with Lake Nicaragua                 391
    310. Early Examination of Nicaragua Route                        392
    311. English Invasion of Nicaragua                               392
    312. Atlantic and Pacific Ship-canal Company                     392
    313. Survey and Project of Col. O. W. Childs                     393
    314. The Project of the Maritime Canal Company                   393
    315. The Work of the Ludlow and Nicaragua Canal Commissions      394
    316. The Route of the Isthmian Canal Commission                  395
    317. Standard Dimensions of Canal Prism                          396
    318. The San Juan Delta                                          397
    319. The San Carlos and Serapiqui Rivers                         398
    320. The Rapids and Castillo Viejo                               399
    321. The Upper San Juan                                          399
    322. The Rainfall from Greytown to the Lake                      399
    323. Lake-surface Elevation and Slope of the River               400
    324. Discharges of the San Juan, San Carlos, Serapiqui           401
    325. Navigation on the San Juan                                  401
    326. The Canal Line through the Lake and Across the West Side    402
    327. Character of the Country West of the Lake                   403
    328. Granada to Managua, thence to Corinto                       404
    329. General Features of the Route                               404
    330. Artificial Harbor at Greytown                               405
    331. Artificial Harbor at Brito                                  407
    332. From Greytown Harbor to Lock No. 2                          408
    333. From Lock No. 2 to the Lake                                 409
    334. Fort San Carlos to Brito                                    410
    335. Examinations by Borings                                     411
    336. Classification and Estimate of Quantities                   412
    337. Classification and Unit Prices                              413
    338. Curvature of the Route                                      413
    339. The Conchuda Dam and Wasteway                               414
    340. Regulation of the Lake Level                                417
    341. Evaporation and Lockage                                     418
    342. The Required Slope of the Canalized River Surface           419
    343. All Surplus Water to be Discharged over the Conchuda Dam    419
    344. Control of the Surface Elevation of the Lake                420
    345. Greatest Velocities in Canalized River                      425
    346. Wasteways or Overflows                                      427
    347. Temporary Harbors and Service Railroad                      427
    348. Itemized Statement of Length and Cost                       427

                               PART VI.
                 _THE PANAMA ROUTE FOR A SHIP-CANAL._

    349. The First Panama Transit Line                               429
    350. Harbor of Porto Bello Established in 1597                   429
    351. First Traffic along the Chagres River, and
                       the Importance of the Isthmian Commerce       431
    352. First Survey for Isthmian Canal Ordered in 1520             431
    353. Old Panama Sacked by Morgan and the Present City Founded    431
    354. The Beginnings of the French Enterprise                     432
    355. The Wyse Concession and the International Congress of 1870  432
    356. The Plan without Locks of the Old Panama Canal Company      433
    357. The Control of the Floods in the Chagres                    434
    358. Estimate of Time and Cost—Appointment of Liquidators        435
    359. The “Commission d’Etude”                                    435
    360. Extensions of Time for Completion                           436
    361. Organization of the New Panama Canal Company, 1894          437
    362. Priority of the Panama Railroad Concession                  437
    363. Resumption of Work by the New Company—The Engineering
                  Commission and the Comité Technique                438
    364. Plan of the New Company                                     439
    365. Alternative Plan of the New Panama Canal Company            440
    366. The Isthmian Canal Commission and its Work                  441
    367. The Route of the Isthmian Canal Commission that of
                      the New Panama Canal Company                   441
    368. Plan for a Sea-level Canal                                  443
    369. Colon Harbor and Canal Entrance                             443
    370. Panama Harbor and Entrance to Canal                         444
    371. The Route from Colon to Bohio                               445
    372. The Bohio Dam                                               446
    373. Variation in Surface Elevation of Lake                      448
    374. The Extent of Lake Bohio and the Canal Line in It           448
    375. The Floods of the Chagres                                   449
    376. The Gigante Spillway or Waste-weir                          450
    377. Storage in Lake Bohio for Driest Dry Season                 451
    378. Lake Bohio as a Flood Controller                            452
    379. Effect of Highest Floods on Current in Channel
                                  in Lake Bohio                      453
    380. Alhajuela Reservoir not Needed at Opening of Canal          453
    381. Locks on Panama Route                                       454
    382. The Bohio Locks                                             454
    383. The Pedro Miguel and Miraflores Locks                       454
    384. Guard-gates near Obispo                                     455
    385. Character and Stability of the Culebra Cut                  455
    386. Length and Curvature                                        456
    387. Small Diversion-channels                                    457
    388. Principal Items of Work to be Performed                     457
    389. Lengths of Sections and Elements of Total Cost              458
    390. The Twenty Per Cent Allowances for Exigencies               459
    391. Value of Plant, Property, and Rights on the Isthmus         460
    392. Offer of New Panama Coal Company to Sell for $40,000,000    461
    393. Annual Costs of Operation and Maintenance                   462
    394. Volcanoes and Earthquakes                                   463
    395. Hygienic Conditions on the Two Routes                       464
    396. Time of Passage Through the Canal                           465
    397. Time for Completion on the Two Routes                       466
    398. Industrial and Commercial Value of the Canal                469
    399. Comparison of Routes                                        471




PART I.

_ANCIENT CIVIL-ENGINEERING WORKS._




CHAPTER I.


=1. Introductory.=—It is a common impression even among civil engineers
that their profession is of modern origin, and it is frequently called
the youngest of the professions. That impression is erroneous from
every point of view. Many engineering works of magnitude and of great
importance to the people whom they served were executed in the very
dawn of history, and they have been followed by many other works of at
least equal magnitude and under circumstances scarcely less noteworthy,
of which we have either remains or records. During the lapse of the
arts and of almost every process of civilization throughout the
darkness of the Middle Ages there was little if any progress made
in the art of the engineer, and what little was done was executed
almost entirely under the name of architecture. With the revival of
intellectual activity and with the development of science the value
of its practical application to the growing nations of the civilized
world caused the modern profession of civil-engineering to take
definite shape and to be known by the name which it now carries, but
which was not known to ancient peoples. Unfortunately the beginnings
of engineering cannot be traced; there is no historical record running
back far enough to render account of the earliest engineering works
whose ruins remain as enduring evidence of what was then accomplished.

It is probably correct to state that the material progress of any
people has always been concurrent with the development of the
art of civil-engineering, and, hence, that the practice of civil
engineering began among the people who made the earliest progress in
civilization, to whom “the art of directing the Great Sources of Power
in Nature for the use and convenience of man” became an early and
imperative necessity. Indeed that conclusion is confirmed by the most
ancient ruins of what may be termed public works that archæological
investigations have revealed to us, among which are those to be found
in the Chaldean region, in India, and in Egypt. Obviously, anything
like a detailed account of the structural and other works of such
ancient character must be lacking, as some of them were built before
even the beginnings of history. Our only data, therefore, are the
remains of such works, and unfortunately they have too frequently been
subject to the destructive operations of both man and nature.


=2. Hydraulic Works of Chaldea and Egypt.=—It is absolutely certain
that the populous centres of prehistoric times could not have existed
nor have been served with those means of communication imperatively
necessary to their welfare without the practice of the art of
engineering, under whatever name they may have applied to it. It is
known beyond any doubt that the anciently populous and prosperous
country at the head of the Persian Gulf and watered by the Euphrates
and the Tigris was irrigated and served by a most complete system
of canals, and the same observation can be made in reference to the
valley of the Nile. It is not possible at this period of that country’s
history to determine to what extent irrigation was practised or how
extensively the former country was served by water transportation
conducted along artificial channels; but hydraulic works, including
dams and sluices with other regulating appliances designed to bring
waters from the rivers on to the land, were certainly among the
earliest executed for the benefit of the communities inhabiting those
regions. The remains of those works, spread over a large territory
in the vicinity of ancient Babylon, Nippur, and other centres of
population, show beyond the slightest doubt that there existed a
network of water communication throughout what was in those days
a country rich in agricultural products and which supported the
operations of a most prosperous commerce. These canals were of ample
dimensions to float boats of no mean size, although much smaller than
those occupied in our larger systems of canal transportation. They
were many miles in length, frequently interlacing among themselves
and intersecting both the Tigris and the Euphrates. The remains of
these canals, some of them still containing water, show that they must
originally have been filled to depths varying from five or six to
fifteen or twenty feet, and that their widths may have been twenty-five
or thirty feet or more. Another curious feature is their occasional
arrangement in twos and threes alongside of each other with embankments
only between. The entire Euphrates-Tigris valley from the head of the
Persian Gulf at least to modern Baghdad (i.e., Babylonia) and possibly
to ancient Nineveh was served by these artificial waterways. Later,
when Alexander the Great made one of his victorious expeditions through
the Assyrian country, he found in the Tigris obstructions to the
passage of his ships down-stream in the shape of masonry dams. This was
between 356 and 322 B.C. These substantial dams were built across the
river for the purpose of intakes to irrigating-canals for the benefit
of the adjacent country. These canals, like those of Egypt, were fitted
with all the necessary regulating-devices of sluices or gates, both
of a crude character, but evidently sufficiently effective for their
purpose.

[Illustration]

It is known that there were in those early days interchanges of large
amounts and varieties of commodities, and it is almost if not quite
certain that the countries tributary to the Persian Gulf not only
produced sufficient grain for their own needs, but also carried on
considerable commerce with the Asiatic coast. We have no means of
ascertaining either the volume or the precise character of the traffic,
but there is little or no doubt of its existence. It is established
also that the waters of the Red Sea and the Nile were connected by a
canal about 1450 B.C. Recent investigations about Nippur and other
sites of ancient cities in that region confirm other indications that
the practice of some branches of hydraulic engineering had received
material development from possibly two to four thousand years before
the Christian era.

=3. Structural Works in Chaldea and Egypt.=—The ruins of ancient
buildings which have been unearthed by excavations in the same vicinity
show with the same degree of certainty that the art of constructing
buildings of considerable dimensions had also made material progress
at the same time, and in many cases must have involved engineering
considerations of a decided character both as to structural materials
and to foundations. Bricks were manufactured and used. Stones were
quarried and dressed for building purposes and applied so as to
produce structural results of considerable excellence. Even the arch
was probably used to some extent in that locality in those early
days, but stone and timber beams were constantly employed. In the
prehistoric masonry constructions of both the Egyptians and Chaldeans
and probably other prehistoric peoples, lime or cement mortar was not
employed, but came into use at a subsequent period when the properties
of lime and cement as cementing materials began to be recognized. The
first cementing material probably used in Egypt was a sticky clay, or
possibly a calcareous clay or earth. The same material was also used
in the valley of the Euphrates, but in the latter country there are
springs of bitumen, where that material exudes from the earth in large
quantities. The use of this asphaltic cement at times possibly involved
that of sand or gravel in some of the early constructions. Later,
lime mortar and possibly a weak hydraulic cement came to be employed,
although there is little if any evidence of the latter material.

Iron was manufactured and used at least in small quantities, and for
some structural purposes, even though in a crude manner. Bituminous
or other asphaltic material was found as a natural product at various
points, and its value for certain structural purposes was well known;
it was used both for waterproofing and for cement. It is practically
certain that the construction of engineering works whose interesting
ruins still remain involved a considerable number of affiliated
engineering operations of which no evidence has yet been found, and of
the employment of tools and appliances of which we have no record. So
far as these works were of a public character they were constructed
by the aid of a very different labor system from that now existing.
The kings or ruling potentates of those early times were clothed with
the most arbitrary authority, sometimes exercised wisely in the best
interests of their people, but at other times the ruling motive was
selfishness actuated by the most intense egotism and brutal tyranny.
Hence all public works were executed practically as royal enterprises
and chiefly by forced labor, perhaps generally without compensation
except mere sustenance. Under such conditions it was possible to
construct works on a scale out of all proportion to national usefulness
and without structural economy. When it is remembered that these
conditions existed without even the shadow of engineering science, it
is obvious that structural economy or the adaptation of well-considered
means to an end will not be found to characterize engineering
operations of prehistoric times. Nevertheless there are evidences of
good judgment and reasonable engineering design found in connection
with some of these works, particularly with those of an hydraulic
character. Water was lifted or pumped by spiral or screw machines and
by water-wheels, and it is not improbable that other appliances of
power served the purposes of many industrial and crude manufacturing
operations which it is now impossible for us to determine.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.—Home Built on Piles in the Land of Punt.]

It is an interesting fact that while many ancient works were
exceedingly massive, like the pyramids, the largest of those of which
the ruins have been preserved seldom seem to show little or any
evidence of serious settlement. Whether the ancients had unusually
sound ideas as to the design of foundation works, or whether those only
have come down to us that were founded directly upon rock, we have
scarcely any means of deciding. Nor can we determine at this time what
special recourses were available for foundation work on soft ground.
Probably one of the earliest recognized instances, if not the earliest,
of the building of structures on piles is that given by Sir George
Rawlinson, when he states that a fleet of merchant vessels sent down
the northeast African coast by the Egyptian queen Hatasu, probably 1700
B.C. or 1600 B.C., found a people whose huts were supported on piles in
order to raise them above the marshy ground and possibly for additional
safety. A representation (Fig. 1) of one of these native homes on piles
is found among Egyptian hieroglyphics of the period of Queen Hatasu.

=4. Ancient Maritime Commerce.=—It is well known that both the Chaldean
region and the Nile valley and delta, at least from Ethiopia to the
Mediterranean Sea, were densely populated during the period of two to
four or five thousand years before the Christian era. By means of the
irrigation works to which reference has already been made both lands
became highly productive, and it is also well known that those peoples
carried on a considerable commerce with other countries, as did the
Phœnicians also, at least between the innumerable wars which seemed
to be the main business of states in those days. These commercial
operations required not only the construction of fleets of what seem
to us small vessels for such purposes, but also harbor-works at least
suitable to the vessels then in use. The marine activity of the
Phœnicians is undoubted, and there is strong reason to believe that
there was also similar activity between Babylonian ports and those east
of them along the shores of the Indian Ocean, perhaps even as far as
ancient Cathay, and possibly also to the eastern coast of Africa.

Investigations in the early history of Egypt have shown that a
Phœnician fleet, constructed at some Egyptian port on the Red Sea,
undoubtedly made the complete circuit of Africa and returned to Egypt
through the Mediterranean Sea the third year after setting out, over
2100 years (about 600 B.C.) before the historic fleet of the Portuguese
explorer Vasco da Gama sailed the same circuit in the opposite
direction. It is therefore probable, in view of these facts, that at
least simple harbor-works of sufficient efficiency for those early days
found place in the public works of the ancient kingdoms bordering upon
the Mediterranean and Red seas and the Persian Gulf.

=5. The Change of the Nile Channel at Memphis.=—Although such obscure
accounts as can be gathered in connection with the founding of the
city of Memphis are so shadowy as to be largely legendary, it has been
established beyond much if any doubt that prior to its building the
reigning Egyptian monarch determined to change the course of the Nile
so as to make it flow on the easterly side of the valley instead of the
westerly. This was for the purpose of securing ample space for his city
on the west of the river, and, also, that the latter might furnish a
defence towards the east, from which direction invading enemies usually
approached. He accordingly formed an immense dam or dike across the
Nile as it then existed, and compelled it to change its course near
the foot of the Libyan Hills on the west and seek a new channel nearer
the easterly side of the valley. This must have been an engineering
work of almost appalling magnitude in those early times, yet even with
the crude means and limited resources of that early period, possibly,
if not probably, at least 5000 B.C., the work was successfully
accomplished.

=6. The Pyramids.=—Among the most prominent ancient structural works
are the pyramids of Egypt, those royal tombs of which so much has been
written. These are found chiefly in the immediate vicinity of Memphis
on the Nile. There are sixty or seventy of them in all, the first of
which was built by the Egyptian king Khufu and is known as the “Great
Pyramid” or the “First Pyramid of Ghizeh.” They have been called “the
most prodigious of all human constructions.” Their ages are uncertain,
but they probably date from about 4000 B.C. to about 2500 B.C. These
are antedated, however, by two Egyptian pyramidal constructions of
still more ancient character whose ages cannot be determined, one at
Meydoum and the other at Saccarah.

[Illustration: A Corner of the Great Pyramid.

(Copyright by S. S. McClure Co., 1902. Courtesy of _McClure’s
Magazine_.)]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.—Section of the Great Pyramid.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

The pyramids at Memphis are constructed of limestone and granite, the
latter being the prominent material and used entirely for certain
portions of the pyramids where the stone would be subjected to severe
duty. The great mass of most of the pyramids consists of roughly hewn
or squared blocks with little of any material properly considered
mortar. The interior portions, especially of the later pyramids, were
sometimes partially composed of chips, rough stones, mud bricks, or
even mud, cellular retaining-walls being used in the latter cases for
the main structural features. In all pyramids, however, the outer or
exposed surfaces and the walls and roofs of all interior chambers were
finished with finely jointed large stones, perhaps usually polished.
The Great Pyramid has a square base, which was originally 764 feet on a
side, with a height of apex above the surface of the ground of over 480
feet. This great mass of masonry contains about 3,500,000 cubic yards
and weighs nearly 7,000,000 tons. The area of its base is 13.4 acres.
The Greek historian Herodotus states that its construction required the
labor of 100,000 men for twenty years. An enormous quantity of granite
was required to be transported about 500 miles down the Nile from the
quarries at Syene. Some of the blocks at the base are 30 feet long with
a cross-section of 5 feet by 4 or 5 feet. The bulk of the entire mass
is of comparatively small stones, although so squared and dressed as
to fit closely together. Familiar descriptions of this work have told
us that the small passages leading from the exterior to the sepulchral
chambers are placed nearly in a vertical plane through the apex. The
highest or king’s chamber, as it is called, measures 34 feet by 17
feet and is 19 feet high, and in it is placed the sarcophagus of King
Khufu. It is composed entirely of granite most exactly cut and fitted
and beautifully polished. The construction of the roof is remarkable,
as it is composed of nine great blocks “each nearly 19 feet long and 4
feet wide, which are laid side by side upon the walls so as to form a
complete ceiling.” There is a singular feature of construction of this
ceiling designed to remove all pressure from it and consisting of five
alternate open spaces and blocks of granite placed in vertical series,
the highest open space being roofed over with inclined granite slabs
leaning or strutted against each other like the letter V inverted.
This arrangement relieves the ceiling of the sepulchral chamber from
all pressure; indeed only the inclined highest set of granite blocks
or slabs carry any load besides their own weight. There are two small
ventilating- or air-shafts running in about equally inclined directions
upward from the king’s chamber to the north and south faces of the
pyramid. These air-shafts are square and vary between 6 and 9 inches on
a side. The age of this pyramid is probably not far from 5000 years.

[Illustration: Entrance to the Great Pyramid.]

The second pyramid is not much inferior in size to the Great Pyramid,
its base being a square of about 707 feet on a side, and its height
about 454 feet. The remaining pyramids are much inferior in size,
diminishing to comparatively small dimensions, and of materials much
inferior to those used in the earlier and larger pyramids.

=7. Obelisks, Labyrinths, and Temples.=—Among other constructions of
the Egyptians which may be called engineering in character, as well
as architectural, are the obelisks, the “Labyrinth” so called, on the
shore of Lake Mœris, and the magnificent temples at the ancient capital
Thebes, which are the most remarkable architectural creations probably
that the world has ever known. These latter were not completed by one
king, as was each of the pyramids. They were sometimes despoiled and
largely wrecked by invading hosts from Assyria, and then reconstructed
in following periods by successive Egyptian kings and again added
to by still subsequent monarchs, whose reigns were characterized
by statesmanship, success in war, and prosperity in the country.
Their construction conclusively indicates laborious operations and
transportation of great blocks of stone characteristic of engineering
development of the highest order for the days in which they took place.
The dates of these constructions are by no means well defined, but they
extend over the period running from probably about 2500 B.C. to about
400 B.C., with the summit of excellence about midway between.

Another class of ancient structures which can receive but a passing
notice, although it deserves more, is the elaborate rock tombs of some
of the old Egyptian monarchs in the rocks of the Libyan Hills. They
were very extensive constructions and contained numerous successions
of “passages, chambers, corridors, staircases, and pillared halls,
each further removed from the entrance than the last, and all covered
with an infinite number of brilliant paintings.” These tombs really
constituted rock tunnels with complicated ramifications which must have
added much to the difficulty of the work and required the exercise of
engineering skill and resources of a high order.

[Illustration]

=8. Nile Irrigation.=—The value of the waters of the Nile for
irrigation and fertilization were fully appreciated by the ancient
Egyptians. They also apparently realized the national value of some
means of equalizing the overflow, although the annual régimen of
the Nile was unusually uniform. There were, however, periods of
great depression throughout the whole Nile valley consequent upon
the phenomenal failure of overflow to the normal extent. One of the
earliest monarchs who was actuated by a fine public spirit undertook to
solve the problem of providing against such depressions by diverting
a portion of the flood-waters of the Nile into an enormous reservoir,
so that during seasons of insufficient inundation the reservoir-waters
could be drawn upon for the purpose of irrigation. This monarch is
known as the good Amenemhat, although the Greeks call him Mœris. In
the Nile valley, less than a hundred miles above Memphis, on the
left side or to the west of the river, there is a gap in the Libyan
Hills leading to an immense depression, the lower parts of which are
much below the level of the water in the Nile. This topographical
depression, perhaps 50 miles in length by 30 in breadth, with an area
between 600 and 700 square miles, now contains two bodies of water or
lakes, one known as the Birket Keroun and the other as Lake Mœris.
The vicinity of this depression is called the Fayoum. A narrow rocky
gorge connects it with the west branch of the Nile, known as Bahr el
Yousuf, and it is probable that during extreme high water in the Nile
there was a natural overflow into the Fayoum. The good Amenemhat, with
the judgment of an engineer, or guided by advisers who possessed that
judgment, appreciated the potential value of this natural depression
as a possible reservoir for the surplus Nile waters and excavated a
channel, possibly a natural channel enlarged, of suitable depth from it
to the Bahr el Yousuf. As a consequence he secured a storage-reservoir
of enormous capacity and which proved of inestimable value to the
lowlands along the Nile in times of shortage in the river-floods.

Investigators have differed much in their conclusions as to the extent
of this reservoir. Some have maintained that only the lower depressions
of the Fayoum were filled for reservoir purposes, while others, like
Mr. Cope Whitehouse, believe that the entire depression of the Fayoum
was utilized with the exception of a few very high points, and that
the depth of water might have been as much as 300 feet in some places.
In the latter case the circuit of the lake would have been from 300 to
500 miles. Whatever may have been the size of the lake, however, its
construction and use with its regulating-works was a piece of hydraulic
engineering of the highest type, and it indicates an extraordinary
development of that class of operations for the period in which it was
executed. The exact date of this construction cannot be determined, but
it may have been as early as 2000 B.C., or perhaps earlier.

=9. Prehistoric Bridge-building.=—The development of the art of
bridge-building seems to have lagged somewhat in the prehistoric
period. The use of rafts and boats prevented the need of bridges for
crossing streams from being pressing. It is not improbable that some
small and crude pile or other timber structures of short spans were
employed, but no remains of this class of construction have been found.
Large quantities of timber and much of an excellent quality were used
in the construction of buildings. That much is known, but there is
practically no evidence leading to the belief that timber bridges of
any magnitude were used by prehistoric people. It is highly probable
that single-timber-beam crossings of small streams were used, but that
must be considered the limit of ancient bridging until other evidence
than that now available is found.

=10. Ancient Brick-making.=—It has already been seen that stone as a
building material has been used since the most ancient periods, and the
use of brick goes back almost as far. Fortunately it was frequently
a custom of the ancient brick-makers to stamp proprietary marks upon
their bricks, and we know by these marks that bricks were made in the
Chaldean regions certainly from 3000 to 4000 years before the Christian
era. In Egypt also the manufacture of brick dates back nearly or quite
as far. Some of these Chaldean bricks, as well as those in other parts
of the ancient world, were of poor quality, readily destroyed by water
or even a heavy storm of rain when driving upon them. Other bricks,
however, were manufactured of good quality of material and by such
methods as to produce results which compare favorably with our modern
building-bricks. The ruins of cities, at least in Assyria and Chaldea,
show that enormous buildings, many of them palaces of kings, were
constructed largely of these bricks, although they were elaborately
decorated with other material. The walls were heavy, indeed so massive
that many of the ruin-mounds are frequently formed almost entirely
of the disintegrated brick of poorer quality. These old builders not
only executed their work on a large scale, but did not hesitate to
pile up practically an artificial mountain of earth, or other suitable
material, on which to construct a palace or temple. The danger of
water to these native bricks was so well known and recognized that
elaborate and very excellent systems of subsurface drains or sewers
were frequently constructed to carry off the storm-water as fast as it
fell.

=11. Ancient Arches.=—In the practice of these building operations it
became necessary to form many openings and to construct roofs for the
sewers or drains, and the arch, both true and false, came to be used in
the Euphrates valley, in that of the Nile, and in other portions of the
ancient world. Pointed sewer-arches of brick have been found in what
is supposed to be the palace of Nimrod on the Tigris River, possibly
of the date about 1300 B.C. Excavations at Nippur have revealed a
mud-brick pointed arch supposed to date back to possibly 4000 B.C.
Also semicircular voussoir arches have been discovered at the ruins
of Khorsabad near Nineveh with spans of 12 to 15 feet. These arches
are supposed to belong to the reign of Sargon, an Assyrian king who
flourished about 705 to 722 B.C. Again, the ancient so-called treasury
of Atreus at Mycenæ in Greece, although a dome, exhibits an excellent
example of the method of forming the false arch, the date of the
construction being probably about 1000 B.C. The main portion of this
structure consists of a pointed dome, the diameter of the base being 48
feet and the interior central height 49 feet. A central section shows a
beehive shape, as in Fig. 6.

[Illustration: VAULTED DRAIN, KHORSABAD FIG. 4.]

[Illustration: VAULTED DRAINS, KHORSABAD. FIG. 5.]

The exterior approach is between two walls 20 feet apart, the
intermediate entrance to the dome or main chamber being a passage
9 feet 6 inches wide at the bottom and 7 feet 10 inches at the top
and about 19 feet high. At right angles to the entrance there is a
chamber 27 feet by 20 feet cut into the adjacent rock, entered through
a doorway about 4 feet 6 inches wide and 9 feet 6 inches high. Both
the main entrance to the dome and the doorway to the adjacent chamber
are covered or roofed with large flat lintel-stones, over which
are the triangular relieving (false) arches, so common in ancient
construction, by which the lintels are relieved of load, the triangular
openings being closed by single, great upright flat stones. There are a
considerable number of these in Greece. The stone used is a “hard and
beautiful breccia” from the neighboring hills and Mount Eubora near
by. The courses of stone are about two feet thick and closely fitted
without cement.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.—Plan and Section of the Treasury of Atreus at
Mycenæ.]

1. Plan of the Treasury of Atreus: _A_, rock-cut chamber, probably a
tomb; _B_, doorway; _C_, approach.

2. Section of the above: _B_, doorway; _C_, approach filled up with
earth; _D_, slope of the ground; _E_, wall on north side of approach;
_F_, lintel stone, weight 133 tons; _G_, door to rock-cut chamber.

The great majority, or perhaps all, of the Assyrian true arches, so
far discovered, are formed of wedge-shaped bricks, most of them being
semicircular, although some are pointed, the span being not over
about 15 feet. The most of the arches found at Nineveh and Babylon
belong to a period reaching possibly from 1300 to 800 B.C., but some
of the Egyptian arches are still older. Egyptians, Assyrians, Greeks,
and other ancient people used false arches formed by projecting each
horizontal course of stones or bricks over that below it on either side
of an opening. The repetition of this procedure at last brings both
sides of the opening together at the top of the arch, and they are
surmounted at that point with a single flat stone, brick, or tile. It
has been supposed by some that these false arches, whose sides may be
formed either straight or curved, exhibit the oldest form of the arch,
and that the true arch with its ring or rings of wedge-shaped voussoirs
was a subsequent development. It is possible that this is true, but
the complete proof certainly is lacking. In Egypt and Chaldea both
styles of arches were used concurrently, and it is probably impossible
to determine which preceded the other. Again, some engineers have
contended that two flat slabs of stone leaning against each other,
each inclined like the rafters of a roof, was the original form of the
arch, as found in the pyramids of Egypt; but it is probable that the
true arch was used in Chaldea prior to the time of the pyramids. Indeed
crude arches of brick have been found at Thebes in Egypt dating back
possibly to 2500 B.C., or still earlier. Aside from that, however,
such an arrangement of two stones is not an arch at all, either true
or false. The arrangement is simply a combination of two beams. A
condition of stress characteristic of that in the true arch is lacking.

The ancient character of the engineering works whose ruins are found
in Chaldea and Assyria is shown by the simple facts that Babylon was
destroyed about the year 690 B.C. and Nineveh about the year 606 B.C.




CHAPTER II.


=12. The Beginnings of Engineering Works of Record.=—In a later
period of the world’s history we reach a stage in the development of
engineering works of which we have both records and remains in such
well-defined shape that the characteristics of the profession may
be realized in a definite manner. This is particularly true of the
civil-engineering works of the Romans. In their sturdy and unyielding
character, with their limitless energy and resolution, the conditions
requisite for the execution of engineering works of great magnitude are
found. An effeminate or generally æsthetic nation like the Greeks would
furnish but indifferent opportunity for the inception and development
of great engineering works, but the resolute and vigorous Roman nation
offered precisely the conditions needed. They appreciated among other
things the absolute necessity of the freest possible communication
with the countries which they conquered and made part of their own
empire. They recognized water transportation as the most economical
and effective, and used it wherever possible. They also realized the
advantages of roads of the highest degree of solidity and excellence.
No other roads have ever been constructed so direct, so solid, and so
admirably adapted to their purposes as those built by the Romans. They
virtually ignored all obstacles and built their highways in the most
direct line practicable, making deep cuts and fills with apparently
little regard for those features which we consider obstacles of
sufficient magnitude to be avoided. They regarded this system of land
communication so highly that they made it radiate from the Golden
Mile-stone in the Roman Forum. The point from which radiated these
roads was therefore in the very centre of Roman life and authority,
and it fitly indicated the importance which the Roman government gave
to the system of communication that bound together with the strongest
bonds all parts of the republic and of the empire.

The design and construction of these roads must have been a matter to
which their constructors gave the most careful attention and study.
They were works involving principles deduced from the most careful
thought and extended experience. There were incorporated in them
the most effective materials of construction then known, and it was
evidently the purpose of their constructors that they should possess
indefinite endurance. The existence of some of them at the present
time, with no other attention given to them than required for ordinary
maintenance, demonstrates that the confidence of the builders was not
misplaced.

[Illustration: Street Fountain and Watering-trough in Pompeii. Called
the Fountain of Plenty, from the figure with Horn of Plenty on the
perforated upright post.]

=13. The Appian Way and other Roman Roads.=—Probably the oldest and
most celebrated of these old Roman roads is the Appian Way. It was the
most substantially built, and the breadth of roadway varied from 14
to 18 feet exclusive of the footwalks. Statius called it the Queen of
Roads. It was begun by Appius Claudius Cæcus, 312 years before the
Christian era. He carried its construction from the Roman gate called
Porta Capena to Capua, but it was not entirely completed till about the
year 30 B.C. Its total length was three hundred and fifty miles, and
it formed a perfect highway from Rome to Brundisium, an important port
on what may be called the southeastern point of Italy. It was built in
such an enduring manner that it appears to have been in perfect repair
as late as 500 to 565 A.D.

The plan of construction of these roads was so varied as to suit
local conditions, but only as required by sound engineering judgment.
They wisely employed local materials wherever possible, but did not
hesitate to transport proper material from distant points wherever
necessary. This seemed to be one of their fundamental principles of
road construction. In this respect the old Romans exhibited more
engineering and business wisdom than some of the American states in
the beginnings of improved road construction in this country. An
examination of the remains of some Roman roads now existing appears to
indicate that in earth the bottom of the requisite excavation was first
suitably compacted, apparently by ramming, although rollers may have
been used. On this compacted subgrade were laid two or three courses
of flat stones on their beds and generally in mortar. The second layer
placed on the preceding was rubble masonry of small stones or of coarse
concrete. On the latter was placed the third layer of finer concrete.
The fourth or surface course, consisting of close and nicely jointed
polygonal blocks, was then put in place, and formed an excellent
unyielding pavement. This resulted in a most substantial roadway,
sometimes exceeding 3 feet in total thickness. It is difficult to
conceive of a more substantial and enduring type of road construction.
The two lower layers were omitted when the road was constructed in
rock. Obviously the finer concrete constituting the second layer from
the top surface was a binder between the pavement surface and the
foundation of the roadway structure.

The paved part of a great road was usually about 16 feet in width,
and raised stone causeways or walls separated it from an unpaved way
on each side having half the width of the main or paved portion. This
seemed to be the type of the great or main Roman roads. Other highways
of less important character were constructed of inferior materials,
earth or clay sometimes being used instead of mortar; but in such cases
greater crowning was employed, and the road was more elevated, possibly
for better drainage. Then, as now, adequate drainage was considered one
of the first features of good road design. City streets were paved with
the nicely jointed polygonal blocks to which reference has already been
made, while the footways were paved with rectangular slabs much like
our modern sidewalks.

[Illustration: EXAMPLE OF EARLY BASALT ROAD.

BY THE TEMPLE OF SATURN ON THE CLIVUS CAPITOLINUS.

FIG. 7.]

The smooth polygonal pavements of the old Romans put to the keenest
shame the barbarous cobblestone street surfaces with which the people
of American cities have been and are still so tortured.

The beneficial influence of these old Roman highways has extended down
even to the present time in France, where some of them were built.
The unnecessarily elaborate construction has not been followed, but
the recognition of the public benefits of excellent roads has been
maintained. The lower course of the foundation-stones apparently began
to be set on edge toward the latter part of the eighteenth century, the
French engineer Tresaguet having adopted that practice in 1764. At the
same time he reduced the thickness of the upper layers. His methods
were but modifications of the old Roman system, and they prevailed in
France until the influence of the English engineers Macadam and Telford
began to be felt.

=14. Natural Advantages of Rome in Structural Stones.=—Although the
ancient Romans were born engineers, possessing the mental qualities and
sturdy character requisite for the analytic treatment and execution of
engineering problems, it is doubtful whether they would have attained
to such an advanced position in structural matters had not the city of
Rome been so favorably located.

The geological character of the great Roman plain and the Roman hills
certainly contributed most materially to the early development of
some of the most prominent of the Roman engineering works. The plain
surrounding the city of Rome is composed largely of alluvial and sandy
deposits, or of the emissions of neighboring volcanoes, of which the
Alban Hills form a group. While these and other volcanic hills in the
vicinity are, and have been for a long period, quiescent, they were
formerly in a very active state. The scoriæ, or matter emitted in
volcanic eruptions, is found there in all possible degrees of coherence
or solidity, from pulverulent masses to hard rock. The characteristic
Roman material called tufa is a mixture of volcanic ash and sand, loose
and friable, as dropped from the eruptions in large quantities or again
compressed into masses with all degrees of hardness. The hard varieties
of yellow or brown tufa form building material much used, although a
considerable percentage of it would not be considered fit building
material for structures of even moderate height at the present time.
The most of it weathers easily, but forms a fairly good building-stone
when protected by a coating of plaster or stucco.

Another class of building-stones found at or in the vicinity of Rome
is the so-called “peperino,” consisting chiefly of two varieties of
conglomerate of ash, gravel, broken pieces of lava, and pieces of
limestone, some possessing good weathering qualities, while others
do not. Ancient quarries of these stones exist whence millions of
cubic yards have been removed, and are still being worked. The better
varieties of “peperino” possess good resisting qualities, and were much
used in those portions of masonry construction where high resistance
was needed, as in the ring-stones of arches, heavily loaded points of
foundations, and other similar situations.

Some of the prehistoric masonry remains of the Romans show that their
earliest constructors appreciated intelligently the qualities of this
stone for portions of works where the duty was most severe.

Lava from the extinct volcanoes of the Alban Hills called “silex” was
used for paving roads and for making concrete. It was hard and of gray
color. At times considerable quantities of this stone were employed.
A species of pure limestone called “travertine,” of a creamy white
color, was quarried at Tibur or Tivoli, and began to be used about
the second century B.C. Vitruvius speaks of its having good weathering
qualities, but naturally it is easily calcined. Its structure is
crystalline, and it is strong in consequence of that quality only when
it is laid on its bed.

=15. Pozzuolana Hydraulic Cement.=—The most valuable of all building
materials of old Rome was the “pozzuolana,” as it furnished the basis
of a strong, enduring, and economic concrete, and permitted almost
an indefinite development of masonry construction. Had there not
been at Rome the materials ready at hand to be manufactured into an
excellent cementing product, it is highly probable that neither the
structural advance nor the commercial supremacy of the Roman people
could have been attained. It is at least certain that the majority
of the great masonry works constructed by the Romans could not have
been built without the hydraulic cementing material produced with so
little difficulty and in such large quantities from the volcanic earth
called pozzuolana. The name is believed to have its origin from the
large masses of this material at Pozzuoli near Naples. Great beds are
also found at and near Rome. The earliest date of its use cannot be
determined, but it has given that strong and durable character to Roman
concrete which has enabled Roman masonry to stand throughout centuries,
to the admiration of engineers.

It is a volcanic ash, generally pulverulent, of a reddish color, but
differs somewhat in appearance and texture according to the locality
from which it is taken. It consists chiefly of silicate of alumina, but
contains a little oxide of iron, alkali, and possibly other components.
The Romans therefore pulverized the pozzuolana and mixed it with lime
to make hydraulic cement. This in turn was mixed with sand and gravel
and broken stone to form mortar and concrete, and that process is
carried on to this day. The concrete was hand-mixed, and treated about
as it is at present. After having been well mixed the Romans frequently
deposited it in layers of 6 to 9 or 10 inches thick, and subjected
it to ramming. In connection with this matter of mortar and concrete
production, Vitruvius observes that pit-sand is preferable to either
sea or river sand.

=16. Roman Bricks and Masonry.=—The Romans produced bricks both by
sun-baking and by burning, although there are now remaining apparently
no specimens of the former in Rome. Bricks were used very largely for
facing purposes, such as a veneer for concrete work. The failure to
recognize this fact has led some investigators and writers into error.
As matter of fact bricks were used as a covering for concrete work, the
latter performing all the structural functions.

The old Roman aqueducts were frequently lined with concrete, made of a
mixture of pozzuolana, lime, and crushed (pounded) bricks or potsherds.
The same material was also used for floors under the fine mortar in
which the mosaics were imbedded.

Marble came into use in Rome about 100 B.C., from Luna, near modern
Carrara, Mt. Hymettus, and Mt. Pentelicus, near Athens and the Isle of
Paros, nearly all being for sculpture purposes. Colored and structural
marbles were brought from quarries in various parts of Italy, Greece,
Phrygia, Egypt, near Thebes (oriental alabaster or “onyx”), Arabia, and
near Damascus.

From the latter part of the first century B.C. the hard building-stones
like granites and basalts were brought to Rome in large quantities.
Most of the granites came from Philæ on the Nile. The basalts came both
from Lacedæmonia and Egypt. Both emery (from the island of Naxos in the
Ægean Sea) and diamond-dust drills were used in quarrying or working
these stones. Ships among the largest, if not the largest, of those
days, were built to transport obelisks and other large monoliths.

The quality of ancient Roman mortar varies considerably as it is now
found. That of the first and second centuries is remarkably hard, and
made with red pozzuolana. In the third century it began to be inferior
in quality, brown pozzuolana sometimes being used. The reason for this
difference in quality cannot be confidently assigned. The deterioration
noted in the third century work may be due to the introduction of bad
materials, or to the wrong manipulation of material intrinsically good,
or it is not unlikely the deterioration is due to a combination of
these two influences. The use of mortar indicates a class of early
construction; it is found in the Servian wall on the Aventine, of date
700 B.C., or possibly earlier.

[Illustration: Dovetail Wooden Tenon. Wooden Dowel. FIG. 8.]

Under the empire (27 B.C. to A.D. 475) large blocks of tufa, limestone
(travertine), or marble were set with very close joints, with either
no mortar or, if any, as thin as paper; end, top, and bottom clamps of
iron were used to bond such stones together. It was also customary, in
laying such large, nicely finished blocks of stone without mortar, to
use double dovetailed wooden ties, or, as in the case of columns, a
continuous central dowel of wood, as shown in the figures.

The joints were frequently so close as to give the impression that the
stones might have been fitted by grinding together. In rectangular
dimension stonework (ashlar) great care was taken, as at present, to
secure a good bond by the use of judiciously proportioned headers and
stretchers. Foundation courses were made thicker than the body of
the superincumbent wall, apparently to distribute foundation weights
precisely as done at present. Weaker stone was used in thicker portions
of walls, and strong stone in thinner portions. Also at points of
concentrated loading, piers or columns of strong stone are found built
into the bodies of walls of softer or weaker stone. Quarry chips,
broken lava, broken bricks, or other suitable refuse fragments were
used for concrete in the interest of economy, the broken material
always being so chosen as to possess a sharp surface to which the
cement would attach itself in the strongest possible bond.

At the quarries where the stones were cut the latter were marked
apparently to identify their places in the complete structure, or
for other purposes. The remains of the quarries themselves as seen
at present are remarkable both for their enormous extent and for the
system on which the quarrying was conducted. It appears that the
systems employed were admirably adapted to the character of the stone
worked, and that the quarrying operations were executed as efficiently
and with as sound engineering judgment as those employed in great
modern quarries.

=17. Roman Building Laws.=—So much depended upon the excellence of the
building in Rome, and upon the materials and methods employed, that
building laws or municipal regulations were enacted in the ancient
city, prescribing kind and quality of material, thickness of walls,
maximum height of buildings, minimum width of streets, and many other
provisions quite similar to those enacted in our modern cities. The
differences appear to arise from the different local conditions to
be dealt with, rather than from any failure on the part of the old
Romans to reach an adequate conception of the general plans suitable
for the masses of buildings in a great city. Prior to the great fire
A.D. 64 in Nero’s reign, an act prescribing fire-proof exterior
coverings of buildings was under consideration, and subsequently to
that conflagration it was enacted into law. Many of the city roads or
streets were paved with closely fitting irregular polygonal blocks of
basalt, laid on concrete foundations, and with limestone (travertine)
curbs and gutters, producing an effect not unlike our modern streets.

=18. Old Roman Walls.=—In no class of works did the ancient Romans show
greater engineering skill or development than in the massive masonry
structures that were built not only in and about the city of Rome, but
also in distant provinces under Roman jurisdiction. Among the home
structures various walls, constituting strong defences against the
attacks of enemies, stand in particular prominence. Some of these great
structures had their origin prior even to historic times. The so-called
“Wall of Romulus,” around the famous Roma Quadrata of the Palentine,
is among the latter. It is supposed by many that this wall formed the
primitive circuit of the legendary city of Romulus. That, however, is
an archæological and not an engineering question, and, whatever its
correct answer may be, the wall itself is a great engineering work;
it demonstrates that the early Romans, whatever may have been their
origin, had attained no little skill in quarrying and in the building
of dry masonry, no mortar being used in this ancient wall. Portions
of it 40 feet high and 10 feet thick at bottom, built against a rocky
hill, are still standing. The courses are 22 to 24 inches thick, and
they are laid as alternate headers and stretchers; the lengths of the
blocks being 3 to 5 feet, and the width from 19 to 22 inches. The ends
of the blocks are carefully worked and true, as are the vertical joints
in much of the wall, although some of the latter, on the other hand,
are left as much as 2 inches open.

Civil engineers, who are familiar with the difficulties frequently
experienced in laying up dry walls of considerable height, as evidenced
by many instances of failure probably within the knowledge of every
experienced engineer, will realize that this great dry masonry
structure must have been put in place by men of no little engineering
capacity. The rock is soft tufa, and marks on the blocks indicate that
chisels from ¼ to ¾ inch in width were used, as well as sharp-pointed
picks. In all cases the faces of the blocks were left undressed, i.e.,
in modern terms they were “quarry-faced.”

=19. The Servian Wall.=—Later in the history of Rome the great Servian
Wall, built chiefly by Servius Tullius to enclose the seven hills
of Rome, occupies a most prominent position as an engineering work.
Part of the wall, all of which belongs to the regal period (753 to
509 B.C.), is supposed to be earlier than Servius, and may have been
planned and executed by Tarquinius Priscus. A part only of the stones
of this wall were laid in cement mortar, and concrete was used, to
some extent at least, in its foundation and backing. The presence of
cement mortar in this structure differentiates it radically from the
wall of Romulus. Probably the discovery of pozzuolana cement, and
the fabrication of mortar and concrete from it, had been made in the
intervening period between the two constructions. Tufa, usually the
softer varieties but of varying degrees of hardness, was mostly used
in this wall, and the blocks were placed, as in the previous instance,
as alternate headers and stretchers in courses about two feet thick.
Portions of the wall 45 feet high and about 12 feet thick have been
uncovered. At points it was pierced with arched openings of 11 feet 5
inches span, possibly as embrasures for catapults or other engines of
war. The upper parts of these openings are circular arches with the
usual wedge-like ring-stones. The voussoirs were cut from peperino
stone. This wall, like that of Romulus, was constructed as a military
work of defence, and at some points it was built up from the bottom
of a wide foss 30 feet deep. At such places it was counterforted or
buttressed, a portion of wall 11 feet 6 inches long being found between
two counterforts, each of the latter being 9 feet wide and projecting 7
feet 9 inches out from the wall.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.—Part of Servian Wall on Aventine.]

[Illustration: FIG. 10.—Wall and Agger of Servius.]

=20. Old Roman Sewers.=—It is demonstrable by the writings of Vitruvius
and others that the old Romans, or at any rate the better educated of
them, possessed a correct general idea of some portions of the science
of Sanitary Engineering, so far as anything of the nature of science
could then be known. Their sanitary views were certainly abreast of
the scientific knowledge of that early day. The existence of the
“cloacæ,” or great sewers, of the ancient city of Rome showed that
its people, or at least its rulers, not only appreciated the value
of draining and sewering their city, but also that they knew how to
secure the construction of efficient and enduring sewers or drains. It
has been stated, and it is probably true, that this system of cloacæ,
or sewers, was so complete that every street of the ancient city was
drained through its members into the Tiber. They were undoubtedly the
result of a gradual growth in sewer construction and did not spring
at once into existence, but they date back certainly to the beginning
of the period of the kings (753 B.C.). The famous Cloaca Maxima, as
great as any sewer in the system, and certainly the most noted, is
still in use, much of it being in good order. The mouth of the latter
where it discharges into the Tiber is 11 feet wide and 12 feet high,
constituting a large arch opening with three rings of voussoirs of
peperino stone. Many other sewers of this system are also built with
arch tops of the same stone, with neatly cut and closely fitting
voussoirs. We do not find, unfortunately, any detailed accounts of the
procedures involved in the design of these sewers, yet it is altogether
probable that the old Roman civil engineers formed the cross-sections,
grades, and other physical features of their sewer system by rational
processes, although they would doubtless appear crude and elementary at
the present time. It would not be strange if they made many failures in
the course of their structural experiences, but they certainly left in
the old Roman sewers examples of enduring work of its kind.

Some portions of this ancient sewer system are built with tops that are
not true arches, and it is not impossible that they antedate the regal
period. These tops are false arches formed of horizontal courses of
tufa or peperino, each projecting over that below until the two sides
thus formed meet at the top. The outline of the crowns of such sewers
may therefore be triangular, curved, or polygonal; they were usually
triangular. Smaller drains forming feeders to the larger members of
the system were formed with tops composed of two flat stones laid with
equal inclination to a vertical line so as to lean against each other
at their upper edges and over the axis of the sewer. This method of
forming the tops of the drains by two inclined flat stones was a crude
but effective way of accomplishing the desired purpose.

The main members of this great sewer system seem to have followed the
meandering courses of small rivers or streams, constituting the natural
drainage-courses of the site of the city. The Cloaca Maxima has an
exceedingly crooked course and it, along with others, was probably
first formed by walling up the sides of a stream and subsequently
closing in the top. Modern engineers know that such an alignment for
a sewer is viciously bad, and while this complicated system of drains
is admirably constructed in many ways for its date, it cannot be
considered a perfect piece of engineering work in the light of present
engineering knowledge. It is probable that the walling in of the sides
of the original streams began to be done in Rome at least as early as
the advent of the Tarquins, possibly as early as 800 B.C. or earlier.

We know little about the original outfalls or points of discharge into
the Tiber, except that, as previously stated, these points were made
through the massive quay-walls constructed during the period of the
kings along both shores of the Tiber, probably largely for defence as
originally built. The discharge of the old Roman sewers through the
face of this quay-wall and into the river is precisely the manner in
which the sewers of New York City in many places are discharged into
the North, East, and Harlem rivers.

The Cloaca Maxima is not the only great ancient sewer thus far
discovered. There are at least two others equal to it, and some of the
single stones with which they are built contain as much as 45 cubic
feet each. These cloacæ were not mere sewers; indeed they were more
drains than sewers, for they carried off flood-waters and the natural
drainage as well as the sewerage. They were therefore combined sewers
and drains closely akin to the sewers of our “combined” systems. The
openings into them were made along the streets of Rome and in public
buildings or some other public places. There is no evidence that
they were ventilated except through these openings, and from each
noxious gases were constantly rising to be taken into the lungs of
the passers-by. It is a rather curious as well as important fact that
so far as excavations have been made there is practically no evidence
that a private residence in Rome was connected with the sewers. The
“latrines” were generally located adjacent to the Roman kitchens and
discharged into the cloacæ.

=21. Early Roman Bridges.=—The early Romans were excellent
bridge-builders as well as constructors in other lines of engineering
work. Although the ancient city was first located on the left bank of
the Tiber, apparently it was but a comparatively short time before
the need of means for readily crossing from bank to bank was felt.
The capacity of the Roman engineers was equal to the demands of the
occasion, and it is now known that seven or eight ancient bridges
connected the two shores of the river Tiber. The oldest bridge is that
known as Pons Sublicius. No iron was used in its construction, as
bronze was the chief metal employed in that early day. The structure
was probably all of timber except possibly the abutments and the piers.
A French engineer, Colonel Emy, has exhibited in his “Traité de l’Art
de la Charpenterie” a plan of this structure restored as an all-timber
bridge with pile foundations. Lanciani, on the other hand, believes
that the abutments and piers must have been of masonry. The masonry
structures, however, known to exist at a later day may have been parts
of the work of rebuilding after the two destructions by floods. The
date of its construction is not known, but tradition places it in
the time of Ancus Marcius. This may or may not be correct. A flood
destroyed the bridge in 23 B.C., and again in the time of Antoninus
Pius, but on both occasions it was rebuilt. The structure has long
since disappeared. The piers only remained for a number of centuries,
and the last traces of them were removed in 1877 in order to clear the
bed of the river.

Fig. 11 shows Colonel Emy’s restoration of the plan for the pile bridge
which Julius Cæsar built across the Rhine in ten days for military
purposes. This plan may or may not include accurate features of the
structure, but it is certain that such a timber bridge was built, and
well preserved pieces of the piles have been taken from under water
at the site little the worse for wear after two thousand years of
submersion.

The censor Ælius Scaurus built a masonry arch across the Tiber about
a mile and a half from Rome in the year 100 B.C. This bridge is now
known as the Ponte Molle, and some parts of the original structure are
supposed to be included in it, having been retained in the repeated
alterations. The arches vary in span from 51 to 79 feet, and the width
of the structure is a little less than 29 feet.

In or about the year 104 A.D. the emperor Trajan constructed what
is supposed to be a wooden arch bridge with masonry piers across the
Danube just below the rapids of the Iron Gate.

[Illustration: Cross-section at Pier.]

[Illustration: Plan at Pier.

FIG. 11.—Bridge thrown across the Rhine by Julius Cæsar.]

A _bas relief_ on the Trajan Column at Rome exhibits the timber arches,
but fails to give the span lengths, which have been the subject of much
controversy, some supposing them to have been as much as 170 feet.

The ancient Pons Fabricius, now known as Ponte Quattiro Capi, still
exists, and it is the only one which remains intact after an expiration
of nearly two thousand years. It has three arches, the fourth being
concealed by the modern embankment at one end; a small arch pierces the
pier between the other two arches. This structure is divided into two
parts by the island of Æsculapius. It is known that a wooden bridge
must have joined that island with the left bank of the Tiber as early
as 192 B.C., and a similar structure on the other side of the island
is supposed to have completed the structure. While Lucius Fabricius
was Commissioner of Roads in the year 62 B.C. he reconstructed the
first-named portion into a masonry structure of arches. An engraved
inscription below the parapets shows that the work was duly and
satisfactorily completed, and further that it was the custom to require
the constructors or builders of bridges to guarantee their work for the
period of forty years. Possession of the last deposit, made in advance
as a guarantee of the satisfactory fulfilment of the contract, could
not be regained until the forty-first year after completion.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.—Trajan’s Bridge.]

The Pons Cestius is a bridge since known as the Pons Gratianus and
Ponte di S. Bartolomeo. Its first construction is supposed to have been
completed in or about 46 B.C., and it was rebuilt for the first time in
A.D. 365. A third restoration took place in the eleventh century. The
modern reconstruction in 1886-89 was so complete that only the middle
arch remains as an ancient portion of the structure. The island divides
the bridge into two parts, the Ship of Æsculapius lying between the
two, but it is not known when or by whom the island was turned into
that form.

Another old Roman bridge, of which but a small portion is now standing,
is Pons Æmilius, the piers of which were founded in 181 B.C., but the
arches were added and the bridge completed only in 143 B.C. It was
badly placed, so that the current of the river in times of high water
exerted a heavy pressure upon the piers, and in consequence it was at
least four times carried away by floods, the first time in the year
A.D. 280.

The discovery of what appears to be a row of three or four ruins of
piers nearly 340 feet up-stream from the Ponte Sisto seems to indicate
that a bridge was once located at that point, although little or
nothing is known of it as a bridge structure. Some suppose it to be the
bridge of Agrippa.

The most historical of all the old Roman bridges is that which was
called Pons Ælius, now known as Ponte S. Angelo, built by Hadrian A.D.
136. Before the reconstruction of the bridge in 1892 six masonry
arches were visible, and the discovery of two more since that date
makes a total of eight, of which it is supposed that only three were
needed in a dry season. The pavement of the approach to this bridge as
it existed in 1892 was the ancient roadway surface. Its condition at
that time was an evidence of the substantial character of the old Roman
pavement.

Below the latter bridge remains of another can be seen at low water. It
is supposed that this structure was the work of Nero, although its name
is not known.

The modern Ponte Sisto is a reconstruction of the old Pons
Valentinianus or bridge of Valentinian I. The latter was an old Roman
bridge, and it was regarded as one of the most impressive of all the
structures crossing the river. It was rebuilt in A.D. 366-67.

The most of these bridges were built of masonry and are of the usual
substantial type characteristic of the early Romans. They were
ornamented by masonry features in the main portions and by ornate
balustrades along either side of the roadway and sidewalks. The roadway
pavements were of the usual irregular polygonal old Roman type, the
sidewalk surfaces being composed of the large slabs or stones commonly
used in the early days of Rome for that purpose.

=22. Bridge of Alcantara.=—Among the old Roman bridges should be
mentioned that constructed at Alcantara in Spain, supposedly by Trajan,
about A.D. 105. It is 670 feet long and its greatest height is 210
feet. One of its spans is partially destroyed. The structure is built
of blocks of stone without cementing material. In this case the number
of arches is even, there being six in all, the central two having
larger spans than those which flank them. It is a bridge of no little
impressiveness and beauty and is a most successful design.

=23. Military Bridges of the Romans.=—In the old Roman military
expeditions the art of constructing temporary timber structures along
lines of communication was well known and practised with a high degree
of ability. Just what system of construction was employed cannot be
determined, but piles were constantly used. At least some of these
timber military bridges, and possibly all, were constructed with
comparatively short spans, the trusses being composed of such braces
and beams as might be put in place between bents of piles. As already
observed, some of the sticks of these bridges have been found in the
beds of German rivers, and at other places, perfectly preserved after
an immersion of about two thousand years. These instances furnish
conclusive evidence of the enduring qualities of timber always
saturated with water.

=24. The Roman Arch.=—The Romans developed the semicircular arch to a
high degree of excellence, and used it most extensively in many sewers,
roads, and aqueducts. While the aqueduct spans were usually made with
a length of about 18 or 20 feet, they built arches with span lengths
as much as 120 feet or more, comparing favorably with our modern
arch-bridge work. They seldom used any other curve for their arches
than the circular, and when they built bridges an odd number of spans
was usually employed, with the central opening the largest, possibly in
obedience to the well-known esthetic law that an odd number of openings
is more agreeable to the eye than an even number. Apparently they were
apprehensive of the safety of the piers from which their arches sprang,
and it was not an uncommon rule to make the thickness of the piers one
third of the clear span. Nearly one fourth of the entire length of the
structure would thus be occupied by the pier thicknesses. Although
the use of mortar, both lime and cement, early came into use with the
Romans, they usually laid up the ring-stones of their arches dry, i.e.,
with out the interposition of mortar joints.




CHAPTER III.


=25. The Roman Water-supply.=—There is no stronger evidence of
engineering development in ancient Rome, nor of the advanced state of
civilization which characterized its people, than its famous system of
water-supply, which was remarkable both for the volume of water daily
supplied to the city and for the extensive aqueducts, many of whose
ruins still stand, as impressive monuments of the vast public works
completed by the Romans. These ruins, and those of many other works,
would of themselves assure us of the elaborate system of supply, but
fortunately there has been preserved a most admirable description of
it, the laws regulating consumption, the manner of administering the
water department of the government of the ancient city, and much other
collateral information of a most interesting character. In the work
entitled, in English, “The Two Books on the Water-supply of the City
of Rome,” by (Sextus) Julius Frontinus, an eminent old Roman citizen,
who, besides having filled the office of water commissioner[1] of
the city, was governor of Britain and three times consul, as well as
having enjoyed the dignity of being augur. He may properly be called
a Roman engineer, although he evidently was a man of many public
affairs, and so esteemed by the emperors who ruled during his time
that he accompanied them in various wars as a military man of high
rank. He wrote seven books at least, viz., “A Treatise on Surveying,”
“Art of War,” “Strategematics,” “Essays on Farming,” “Treatise on
Boundaries, Roads, etc.,” “A Work on Roman Colonies,” and his account
of the water-works of Rome, entitled “De Aquis.” It is the latter
book in which engineers are particularly interested. The translation
of this book from the original Latin is made from what is termed the
“Montecassino Manuscript,” an account of which with the translation is
given by Mr. Clemens Herschel in his entertaining work, “Frontinus, and
the Water-supply of the City of Rome.”

[1] The first permanent water commissioner in Rome was M. Agrippa,
son-in-law of Cæsar Augustus, who took office B.C. 34. He was one of
the greatest Roman engineers and constructors, if indeed he was not the
first in rank.

As near as can be determined Frontinus lived from about A.D. 35 to
A.D. 103 or 104. Judging from the offices which Frontinus held and
the honors which he enjoyed throughout his life, it would appear that
he was a patrician; he was certainly a man of excellent executive
capacity, of intellectual vigor and refined taste, and a conscientious
public servant. The water-supply of the city was held by the Romans
to be one of the most important of all its public works, and its
administration during the life of Frontinus was entrusted to what
we should call a water commissioner, appointed by the emperor. It
was considered to be an office of dignity and honor, and the proper
discharge of its responsibilities was a public duty which required a
high order of talent, as well as great integrity of character.

=26. The Roman Aqueducts.=—Frontinus states that from the foundation
of the city of Rome until 313 B.C., i.e., for a period of 441 years,
the only water-supply was that drawn either from the river Tiber or
from wells or springs. The veneration of the Romans for springs is a
well-known feature of their religious tenets. They were preserved with
the greatest care, and hedged about with careful safeguards against
irreverent treatment or polluting conditions. Apparently after this
date the people of Rome began to feel the need of a public water-supply
adequate to meet the requirements of a great city. At any rate, in
the year 313 B.C. the first aqueduct, called the Appia, for bringing
public water into the city of Rome was attempted by Censors Appius
Claudius, Crassus, and C. Plautius, the former having constructed the
aqueduct, and the latter having found the springs. Appius must have
been an engineer of no mean capacity, for it was he who constructed
the first portion of the Appian Way. The origin of this water-supply
is some springs about 10 miles from Rome, and they may now be seen at
the bottom of stone quarries in the valley of the Anio River. This
aqueduct, Aqua Appia, is mostly an underground waterway, only about
300 feet of it being carried on masonry arches. At the point where
it enters the city it was over 50 feet below the surface; its clear
cross-section is given as 2½ feet wide by 5 feet high. The elevation of
its water surface in Rome was probably under 60 feet above sea-level.

[Illustration: Claudia, of dimension stone, and Anio Novus, of brick
and concrete, on top of it.]

=27. Anio Vetus.=—The next aqueduct built for the water-supply of Rome
was called Anio Vetus. It was built 272-269 B.C., and is about 43 miles
long; it took its water from the river Anio. About 1100 feet of its
length was carried above ground on an artificial structure. It also
was a low-level aqueduct, the elevation at which it delivered water
at Rome being about 150 feet above sea-level. It was built of heavy
blocks of masonry, laid in cement, and the cross-section of its channel
was about 3.7 feet wide by 8 feet high. In the year 144 B.C. the Roman
senate made an appropriation equal to about $400,000 of our money to
repair the two aqueducts already constructed, and to construct a new
one called Aqua Marcia, to deliver water to the city at an elevation
of about 195 feet above sea-level. This aqueduct was finished 140
B.C.; it is nearly 58 miles long, and carried water of most excellent
quality through a channel which, at the head of the aqueduct, was
5⅞ feet wide by 8³/₁₀ feet high, but farther down the structure was
reduced to 3 feet wide by 5⁷/₁₀ feet high. The excellent water of these
springs is used for the present supply of Rome, and is brought in the
Aqua Pia, built in 1869, as a reconstruction of the old Aqua Marcia.
This aqueduct, like its two predecessors, is built of dimension stone,
18 inches by 18 inches by 42 inches, or larger, laid in cement; but
concrete and brick were used in the later aqueducts, with the exception
of Claudia.

=28. Tepula.=—The aqueduct called Aqua Tepula, about 11 miles in
length, and completed 125 B.C., was constructed to bring into the
city of Rome a slightly warm water from the volcanic springs situated
on the hill called Monte Albani (Alban Hills) southeast of Rome. The
temperature of these springs is about 63° Fahr. In the year B.C. 33
Agrippa caused the water from some springs high up the same valley to
be brought in over the aqueduct Aqua Julia, 14 miles long. This latter
water was considerably colder than that of the Tepula Springs. The two
waters were united before reaching Rome and allowed to flow together
far enough to be thoroughly mixed. They were then divided and carried
into Rome in two conduits. The volume of water carried in the Aqua
Julia was about three times that taken from the Tepula Springs, the
cross-section of the latter being only 2.7 feet wide by 3.3 feet high,
while that of Julia was 2.3 feet by 4.6 feet. The water from Aqua Julia
entered Rome at an elevation of about 212 feet above sea-level, and
that from Aqua Tepula about 11 feet lower.

=29. Virgo.=—The sixth aqueduct in chronological order was called
Virgo, and it was completed 19 B.C. It takes water from springs about 8
miles from Rome and only about 80 feet above sea-level, but the length
of the aqueduct is about 13 miles. The delivery of water in the city by
this aqueduct is about 67 feet above that level. The cross-section of
this channel is about 1.6 feet wide and 6.6 feet high.

=30. Alsietina.=—The preceding aqueducts are all located on the left or
easterly bank of the Tiber, but one early structure was located on the
right bank of the Tiber to supply what was called the Trans-Tiberine
section of the city, and it was known as Aqua Alsietina. The emperor
Augustus had this aqueduct constructed during his reign, and it was
finished in the year A.D. 10. Its source is a small lake of the same
name with itself, about 20 miles from Rome. The elevation of this lake
is about 680 feet above sea-level, while the water was delivered at
an elevation of about 55 feet above the same level. The water carried
by this aqueduct was of such a poor quality that Frontinus could not
“conceive why such a wise prince as Augustus should have brought to
Rome such a discreditable and unwholesome water as the Alsietina,
unless it was for the use of Naumachia.” The latter was a small
artificial lake or pond in which sham naval fights were conducted.

[Illustration:

Sand and Pebble Catch-tanks near Tivoli. Dimension-stone aqueducts of
Marcia at either end of the tank built of small stone; _opus incretum_.
The arches are chambers of the tanks.]

=31. Claudia.=—The eighth aqueduct described by Frontinus is the Aqua
Claudia, built of dimension stone, which he calls a magnificent work
on account of the large volume of water which it supplied, its good
quality, and the impressive character of considerable portions of the
aqueduct itself, between 9 and 10 miles being carried on arches. It was
built in 38-52 A.D. and is forty-three miles long. The sources of its
supply are found in the valley of the Anio, and consequently it belongs
to the system on the left bank of the Tiber. The cross-section of its
channel was about 3.3 feet wide by 6.6 feet high. It was a work greatly
admired by the Roman people, as is evidenced by the praise “given to
it by Roman authors who wrote at that time.” It delivered water at the
Palatine 185 feet above sea-level. According to Pliny, the combined
cost of it and the Aqua Anio Novus was 55,500,000 sestertii, or nearly
$3,000,000. This aqueduct probably belongs to the highest type of Roman
hydraulic engineering. It follows closely the location of the Aqua
Marcia, although its alignment now includes a cut-off tunnel about 3
miles long, the latter having been constructed about thirty-six years
after the aqueduct was opened. Mr. Clemens Herschel observes that the
total sum expended for these two aqueducts makes a cost of about $6 per
lineal foot for the two. The arches of this aqueduct and those of the
Anio Novus have clear spans of 18 to 20 feet, with a thickness at the
crown of about 3 feet.

=32. Anio Novus.=—The ninth aqueduct described by Frontinus is called
Anio Novus. It was also constructed in the years A.D. 38-52. This
aqueduct has a length of about 54 miles and takes its supply from
artificial reservoirs constructed by Nero at his country-seat in the
valley of the Anio near modern Subiaco. This structure is built of
brick masonry lined with concrete. That portion of the Aqua Claudia
which is located on the Campagna carries for 7 miles the Anio Novus,
and it forms the long line of aqueduct ruins near Roma Vecchia. The
upper surface of the arch-ring at the crown forms the bottom of the
channel of the aqueduct. The cross-section of the channel of the Anio
Novus was 3.3 feet wide by 9 feet high. The elevation of the water in
this, as in the Claudia, when it reached the Palatine was about 185
feet above sea-level. The Anio Novus in some respects would seem to be
a scarcely less notable work than the Claudia. About 8 miles of its
length is carried on arches, some of them reaching a height of about
105 feet from the ground.

=33. Lengths and Dates of Aqueducts.=—These nine aqueducts constituted
all those described by Frontinus, as no others were completed prior to
his time. Five others were, however, subsequently completed between
the years 109 A.D. and 306 A.D., but enough has already been shown in
connection with the older structures to show the character of the
water-supply of ancient Rome.

The following tabular statement is a part of that given by Mr. F. W.
Blackford in “The Journal of the Association of Engineering Societies,”
December, 1896. It shows the dates and lengths of the ancient aqueducts
of Rome between the years 312 B.C. and 226 A.D., with the length of
the arch portions. The list includes those built up to the end of the
Empire. It will be observed that the total length of the aqueducts
is 346 miles, and that of the arch portions 44 miles. The figures
vary a little from those given by Lanciani and others, but they are
essentially accurate.

    +------------+--------+----------+----------+
    |            |        |  Total   |Length of |
    |   Name.    | Date.  |Length in |Arches in |
    |            |  B.C.  |  Miles.  |  Miles.  |
    +------------+--------+----------+----------+
    |Appia       |   312  |   11     |  Little  |
    |Vetus       | 272-264|   43     |     ”    |
    |Marcia      |   145  |   61     |    12    |
    |Tepula      |   126  |   13     |  Little  |
    |Julia       |    34  |   15     |     6    |
    |Virgo       |    21  |   14     |  Little  |
    |            |        |          |          |
    |            |   A.D. |          |          |
    |Alsietina   |    10  |   22     |  Little  |
    |Augusta     |    10  |    6     |     ”    |
    |Claudia     |    50  |   46     |    10    |
    |Anio Novus  |    52  |   58     |     9    |
    |Triana      |   109  |   42     |  Little  |
    |Alexandrina |   226  |   15     |     7    |
    |            +--------+----------+----------+
    |   Totals            |  346     |    44    |
    +------------+--------+----------+----------+

=34. Intakes and Settling-basins.=—The preceding brief descriptions
of the old Roman aqueducts give but a superficial idea of the real
features of those great works and of the system of water-supply of
which they were such essential portions. Enough has been shown,
however, to demonstrate conclusively that the engineers and
constructors of old Rome were men who, on the one hand, possessed a
high order of engineering talent and, on the other, ability to put in
place great structures whose proportions and physical characteristics
have commanded the admiration of engineers and others from the time
of their completion to the present day. If a detailed statement were
to be made in regard to the water-supply of ancient Rome, it would
appear that much care was taken to insure wholesome and potable water.
At the intakes of a number of the aqueducts, reservoirs or basins
were constructed in which the waters were first received and which
acted as settling-basins, so that as much sedimentation as possible
might take place. Similar basins (picinæ) were also constructed at
different points along the aqueducts for the same purpose and for
such other purposes as the preservation of the water in a portion
of the aqueduct in case another portion had to be repaired or met
with an accident which for the time being might put it out of use.
These basins were usually constructed of a number of apartments, the
water flowing from one to the other, very much as sewage in some
sewage-disposal works flows at the present time through a series of
settling-basins. The object of these picinæ was the clearing of the
water by sedimentation. Indeed there was in some cases a use of salt in
the water to aid in clarifying it. This is an early type of the modern
process of clarifying water by chemical precipitation, not the best of
potable water practice, but one that is sometimes permissible.

=35. Delivery-tanks.=—The aqueducts brought the water to castellæ
or delivery-tanks, i.e., small reservoirs, both inside the city and
outside of it, and from these users were obliged by law to take
their supplies; that is, for baths, for fountains, for public uses,
for irrigation, and for private uses. When Frontinus wrote his “De
Aquis” a little less than three tenths of all the water brought to
Rome by the aqueducts was used outside of the city. The remainder was
distributed in the city from 247 delivery-tanks or small reservoirs,
about one sixth of it being consumed by 39 ornamental fountains and 591
water-basins.

=36. Leakage and Lining of Aqueducts.=—These aqueducts were by no
means water-tight. Indeed they were subject to serious leakage, and
Frontinus shows that forces of laborers were constantly employed in
maintaining and repairing them. As has been stated, the older aqueducts
were built of dimension stones, while the later were constructed of
concrete or bricks and concrete. The channels of these aqueducts, as
well as reservoirs and other similar structures, were made as nearly
water-tight as possible by lining them with a concrete in which
pottery, broken into fine fragments, was mixed with mortar.

[Illustration: Claudia and Anio Novus near Porta Furba. Repairs in
brickwork and in a composite of concrete and brickwork.]

=37. Grade of Aqueduct Channels.=—The fall of the water surface in
these aqueducts cannot be exactly determined. The levelling-instruments
used by the Romans were simple and, as we should regard them, crude,
although they served fairly well the purposes to which they were
applied. They were not sufficiently accurate to determine closely the
slope or grade of the water surface in the aqueduct channels. The
deposition of the lime from the water along the water surface on the
sides of the channels in many cases would enable that slope to be
determined at the present time, but sufficiently careful examinations
have not yet been made for that purpose. Lanciani states that the
slopes in the Aqua Anio Vetus vary from about one in one thousand to
four in one thousand. An examination of the incrustation on the sides
of the Aqua Marcia near its intake makes it appear that the slope of
the surface was about .06 foot per 100 feet, which would produce a
velocity, according to the formula of Darcy, of about 3.3 feet per
second. In some aqueducts built in Roman provinces it would appear that
slopes have been found ranging from one in six hundred to one in three
thousand.

=38. Qualities of Roman Waters.=—The chief characteristic in most of
the old Roman waters was their extreme hardness. They range from 11°
to 48° of hardness, the latter belonging to the water of the Anio,
while the potable waters in this country scarcely reach 5°. The old
Romans recognized these characteristics of their waters and, as has
been intimated, used the best of them for table purposes, while the
less wholesome were employed for fountains, flushing sewers, and other
purposes not affected by undesirable qualities. The water from Claudia,
for instance, was used for the imperial table. The water from the Aqua
Marcia was also of excellent quality, while that brought in by the Aqua
Alsietina was probably not used for potable purposes at all.

=39. Combined Aqueducts.=—In several cases a number of aqueduct
channels were carried in one aqueduct. A marked instance of this kind
was that of Julia, Tepula, and Marcia, all being carried in vertical
series in one structure. Numerous instances of this sort occurred.

=40. Property Rights in Roman Waters.=—In reading the two books of
Frontinus one will be impressed by the property values which the old
Romans created in water rights. The laws of Rome were exceedingly
explicit as to the rights of water-users and as to the manner in which
water should be taken from the aqueducts and from the pipes leading
from the reservoirs in and about the city. The proper methods for
taking the water and using it were carefully set forth, and penalties
were prescribed for violations of the laws pertaining to the use of
water. There were many abuses in old Rome in the administration of
the public water-supply, and one of the most troublesome duties which
Frontinus had to perform lay in reforming those abuses and preventing
the stealing of water. The unit of use of water (a “quinaria,” whose
value is not now determinable) was the volume which would flow from
an orifice .907 inch in diameter and having an area of about .63 of
a square inch. Mr. Herschel shows that in consequence of the failure
of the Romans to understand the laws of the discharge of water under
varying heads, the quinaria may have ranged from .0143 cubic foot to
.0044 cubic foot per second or between even wider limits.

=41. Ajutages and Unit of Measurement.=—Frontinus describes twenty-five
ajutages of different diameter, officially approved in connection with
the Roman system of public water-supply; but only fifteen of these were
actually used in his day. All of these were circular in form, although
two others had been used prior to that time. They varied in diameter
from .907 to 8.964 English inches and were originally made of lead, but
that soft metal lent itself too easily to the efforts of unscrupulous
water-users to enlarge them by thinning the metal. In his time they
were made of bronze, which was a hard metal and could not be tampered
with so as to enlarge its cross-section. The discharge through the
smallest of these ajutages was the quinaria, the unit in the scale of
water rights. The largest of the above ajutages had a capacity of a
little over 97 quinariæ.

This unit (the quinaria) was based wholly on superficial area, and had
no relation whatever to the head over the orifice or to the velocity
corresponding to that head. Although Frontinus refers in several cases
to the fact that the deeper the ajutage is placed below the water
surface the greater will be the discharge through it, also to the fact
that a channel or pipe of a given area of cross-section will pass
more water when the latter flows through it with a high velocity, he
and other Roman engineers seem to have failed completely to connect
the idea of volume of discharge to the product of area of section by
velocity. In the Roman mind of his day, and for perhaps several hundred
years after that, the area of the cross-section of the prism of water
in motion was the only measure of the volume of discharge. This seems
actually preposterous at the present time, and yet, as observed by Mr.
Herschel, possibly a majority of people now living have no clearer idea
of the volume of water flowing in either a closed or open channel.
Existing statutes even respecting water rights bear out this statement,
improbable as it may at first sight appear. This early Roman view of
the discharge is, however, in some respects inexplicable, for Hero of
Alexandria wrote, probably in the period 100-50 B.C., that the section
of flow only was not sufficient to determine the quantity of water
furnished by a spring. He proceeded to set forth that it was also
necessary to know the velocity of the current, and further explained
that by forming a reservoir into which a stream would discharge for an
hour the flow or discharge of that stream for the same length of time
would be equal to the volume of water received by the reservoir. His
ideas as to the discharge of a stream of water were apparently as clear
as those of a hydraulic engineer of the present time. Indeed the method
which he outlines is one which is now used wherever practicable.

It has been a question with some whether Frontinus and other Roman
engineers were acquainted with the fact that a flaring or outward
ajutage would increase the flow or discharge through the orifice.
The evidence seems insufficient to establish completely that degree
of knowledge on their part. At the same time, in the CXII chapter of
Frontinus’ book on the “Water-supply of the City of Rome,” he states
that in some cases pipes of greater diameter than that of the orifice
were improperly attached to legal ajutages. He then states: “As a
consequence the water, not being held together for the lawful distance,
and being on the contrary forced through the short restricted distance,
easily filled the adjoining larger pipe.” He was convinced that the
use of a pipe with increased diameter under such circumstances would
give the user of the water a larger supply than that to which he was
entitled, and he was certainly right in at least most cases.

The actual unit orifice through which the unit volume of water called
the quinaria was discharged was usually of bronze stamped by a proper
official, thus making its use legal for a given amount of water. The
Roman engineers understood that such an orifice should be inserted
accurately at right angles to the side of the vessel or orifice, and
that was the only legal way to make the insertion. Furthermore, the law
required that there should be no change in the diameter of the pipe
within 50 feet of the orifice. It was well known that a flaring pipe
of increased diameter applied immediately at the orifice would largely
increase the discharge, and unscrupulous people resorted to that means
for increasing the amount of water to be obtained for a given price.

=42. The Stealing of Water.=—It appears also that Frontinus experienced
much trouble from clandestine abstraction of water from reservoirs and
water-pipes. The administration of the water commissioner’s office
had been exceedingly corrupt prior to his induction into office, and
some of his most troublesome official work arose from his efforts to
detect water-thieves, and to guard the supply system from being tapped
irregularly or illegally. We occasionally hear of similar instances of
water-stealing at the present time, which shows that human nature has
not altogether changed since the time of Frontinus.

=43. Aqueduct Alignment and Design of Siphons.=—The alignment of some
of the Roman aqueducts followed closely the contours of the hills
around the heads of valleys, while others took a more direct line
across the valleys on suitable structures, frequently series of arches.
Judging from our own point of view it may not be clear at first sight
why such extensive masonry constructions were used when the aqueduct
could have been kept in excavation by following more closely the
topography of the country. There is little doubt that the Romans knew
perfectly well what they were about. Indeed it is definitely stated in
some of the old Roman writings that the structures were built across
valleys for the specific purpose of saving distance which, in most
instances at least, meant saving in cost.

These masonry structures, it must be remembered, were built of material
immediately at hand. Furthermore, these aqueducts were generally only
made of sufficient width for the purpose of carrying water-channels.
They were not wide structures. In some cases they were not more than
8 feet or 9 feet wide for a height of nearly 100 feet. The cost of
construction was thus largely reduced below that of wide structures.

[Illustration: Old Roman Lead and Terra-cotta Pipe.]

The Romans were perfectly familiar with the construction of inverted
siphons. As a matter of fact Vitruvius, in Chapter VII of his Eighth
book, describes in detail how they should be designed. His specific
descriptions relate to lead pipes, but it is clear from what he states
at other points that he considered earthenware pipes equally available.
He sets forth how the pipes should be carried down one slope, along
the bottom of the valley, and up the other slope, the lowest portion
being called the “venter.” He realized the necessity of guarding all
elbows in the pipe by using a single piece of stone as a detail for the
elbow, a hole being cut in it in each direction in which the adjoining
sections of pipe should be inserted, the sections of lead pipe being
10 feet long, and even goes so far as to describe the stand-pipes that
should be inserted for the purpose of allowing air to escape. Vitruvius
also advises that the water should not only be admitted to inverted
siphons in a gradual manner, but that ashes should be thrown into the
water when the siphon is first used in order that they may settle into
the joints or open places so as to close any existing leaks. Lead pipe
siphons, 12 to 18 inches in diameter, with 1 inch thickness of metal
under 200 feet head, built in ancient times, have been found at Lyons
in France. Also a drain-pipe siphon with masonry reinforcement was
built at Alatri in Italy 125 B.C. to carry water under a head of
about 340 feet. There are other notable instances of inverted siphons
constructed and used during the ancient Roman period, some of them
being of lead pipe imbedded in concrete.




CHAPTER IV.


=44. Antiquity of Masonry Aqueducts.=—Masonry aqueducts, either solid
or with open arches, were not first constructed by the city of Rome;
their origin was much farther back in antiquity than that. The Greeks
at least used them before the Roman engineers, and it is not unlikely
that the latter drew their original ideas from the former, if indeed
they were not instructed by them. Nor during the times of the Romans
was the construction of aqueducts confined to Rome. Wherever Roman
colonies were created it would appear that vast sums were expended in
the construction of aqueducts for the purpose of suitably supplying
cities with water. Such constructions are found at many points in
Spain, France, and other countries which were in ancient times Roman
colonies. It is probable that there are not less than one hundred, and
perhaps many more, of such structures in existence at the present time.

=45. Pont du Gard.=—Among the more prominent aqueducts constructed
during the old Roman period and outside of Italy were the Pont du Gard
at Nismes in the south of France, and those at Segovia and Tarragona in
Spain. The Pont du Gard has three tiers of arches with a single channel
at the top. The greatest height above the river Gardon is about 180
feet, and the length of the structure along the second tier of arches
is 885 feet. The arches in the lowest tier are 51 feet, 63 feet, and
80.5 feet in span, while the arches in the highest tier are uniformly
15 feet 9 inches in span. The thickness of the masonry at the top of
the structure from face to face is 11 feet 9 inches, and 20 feet 9
inches at the lower tier of arches, the thickness at the intermediate
tier being 15 feet.

The largest arch has a depth of keystone of 5 feet 3 inches, while the
other arches of the lower tier have a depth of keystone of 5 feet. The
depth of the ring-stones of the small upper arches is 2 feet 7 inches.
This structure forms a sort of composite construction, the lower arches
constituting four separate arch-rings placed side by side, making a
total thickness of 20 feet 9 inches. The intermediate arches consist
of three similar series of narrow arches placed side by side, but the
masonry of the upper tier is continuous throughout from face to face.
The three and four parallel series of arches of the middle and lowest
tiers are in no way bonded or connected with each other. There is no
cementing material in any of the arch-rings, but cement mortar was used
in rubble masonry or concrete around the channel through which the
water flowed above the upper tier of small arches. This structure is
supposed to have been built between the years 31 B.C. and 14 A.D.

=46. Aqueducts at Segovia, Metz, and Other Places.=—The Segovia
aqueduct was built by the emperor Trajan about A.D. 100-115. It is
built without mortar, and has 109 arches, but 30 are modern, being
reproductions of the old. It has a length of over 2400 feet, and in
places its height is about 100 feet. The old Tarragona aqueduct is
built with two series of arches, 25 being in the upper series and 11
in the lower. It is 876 feet long and has a maximum height of over 80
feet. At Mayence there are ruins of an aqueduct about 16,000 feet long.
In Dacia, Africa, and Greece there are other similar ruins. Near Metz
are the remains of a large old Roman aqueduct. It consisted of a single
row of arches, and had no features of particular prominence. This
latter observation, however, could not be made of one of the bridges in
the aqueduct at Antioch. Although the masonry and design of this latter
structure were crude, its greatest height is 200 feet, and its length
700 feet. The lower portion of this structure was a solid wall with the
exception of two openings, the arches extending in a single row along
its upper portion. On the island of Mytilene are the ruins of another
old aqueduct about 500 feet long, with a maximum height of about 80 feet.

The building of these remarkable aqueducts was practised at least
down to the later periods of the Roman empire, that of Pyrgos, near
Constantinople,—built not earlier than the tenth century,—being an
excellent example. It consists of two branches at right angles to each
other. The greater branch is 670 feet long, and its greatest height
106 feet. There are three tiers of arches, the two upper being of
semicircular and the lower of Gothic outline. The number in each tier
for a given height is the same, but with an increasing length of span
in rising from the lowest to the highest tier. Thus the highest tier of
piers is the lightest, relieving the top of the structure of weight.
The lowest row of piers is reinforced by counterforts or buttresses.
At the top of the structure the width or thickness is 11 feet, but the
thickness increases uniformly to 21 feet at the bottom. The smaller
branch of the aqueduct is 300 feet long, and was built with twelve
semicircular arches.

=47. Tunnels.=—The construction of tunnels, especially in connection
with the building of aqueducts, constituting a branch of engineering
procedure, was frequently practised by the ancient nations. Large
tunnel-works were executed many times by the ancient Greeks and Romans.
It would seem that the Greeks were the instructors of the Romans in
this line of engineering operations. As early as B.C. 625 we are told
that the Greek engineer Eupalinus constructed a tunnel 8 feet broad, 8
feet high, and 4200 feet long, through which was built a channel for
carrying water to the city of Athens.

Sixty-five years later a similar work was constructed for the same
Grecian city. Indeed it appears that tunnels were constructed in the
time of the earliest history of aqueducts built to supply ancient Greek
and Roman cities with water.

It is certain that at the beginning of the Christian era tunnelling
processes were well known among the Romans. Vitruvius writes, in
speaking of the construction of aqueducts, in Chapter VII of the Eighth
Book: “If hills intervene between the city wall and spring head,
tunnels underground must be made, preserving the fall above assigned;
if the ground cut through be sandstone or stone, the channel may be cut
therein; but if the soil be earth or gravel, side walls must be built,
and an arch turned over, and through this the water may be conducted.
The distance between the shafts over the tunnelled part is to be 120
feet.”

The Romans pierced rock in their tunnel-work, not only by chiselling,
but sometimes by building fire against the rock so as to heat it as
hot as possible. The heated rock was then drenched with cold water, so
that it might be cracked and disintegrated to as great an extent as
practicable. According to Pliny vinegar was used instead of water in
some cases, under the impression that it was more efficacious.

[Illustration: Roman water-pipe made of bored-out blocks of stone.]

One of the methods mentioned by Vitruvius is plainly “the cut and
cover” procedure of the present day. In Duruy’s history of Rome a
tunnel over three miles long is mentioned on a line of an aqueduct at
Antibes in France, as well as another constructed to drain Lake Fucinus
in Italy, about A.D. 50. It is there stated that the latter required
eleven years’ labor of 30,000 men to build a rock tunnel with a section
of 86 to 96 square feet 18,000 feet long.

Lanciani, in his “Ancient Rome,” states that about A.D. 152 a Roman
engineer (Nonius Datus) began the construction of a tunnel in Algeria,
and after having carefully laid out the axis of the tunnel across the
ridge “by surveying, and taking the levels of the mountains,” left the
progress of the work in the hands of the contractor and his workmen.
After the rather long absence from such a work of four years he was
called back by the Roman governor to ascertain why the two opposite
sections of the tunnel, as constructed, would not meet, and to take
the requisite measures for the completion of the work through which
water was to be conducted to Saldæ in a suitable channel. He explains
that there should have been no difficulty, and that the failure of the
two headings to meet was due to the negligence of the contractor and
his assistant, whom he states “had committed blunder upon blunder,”
although he writes, “As always happens in these cases, the fault was
attributed to the engineer.” He solved the problem by connecting the
two approximately parallel tunnels by a transverse tunnel, so that
water was finally brought to the city of Saldæ.

The art of tunnel construction has been one of the most widely
practised branches of Civil-Engineering from the times of the ancient
Assyrians, Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, and other ancient nations down to
the present.

=48. Ostia, the Harbor of Rome.=—The capacity of the ancient Romans
to build harbor-works is shown by what they did at Ostia, which was
then at the mouth of the Tiber, but is now not less than four miles
inland from the present shore line. At the Ostia mouth of the river the
present annual average advance seaward is not less than 30 feet, and at
the Fiumicino mouth about one third of that amount.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.—Plan of Ostia and Porto.]

The ancient port of Ostia is supposed to have been founded during the
reign of the fourth king Ancus Marcius, but it attained its period
of greatest importance during the reign of Claudius and Trajanus. At
that time the fertile portions of the Campania had been so largely
taken up by the country-places of the wealthy Romans that it was no
longer possible for the peasantry to cultivate sufficient ground to
yield the grain required by the home market of the Romans. Large
fleets were consequently engaged in the foreign grain-trade of Rome.
The wheat and other grain required in great quantities was grown
mostly in Egypt, although Carthage and other countries supplied large
amounts. The great fleets occupied in this trade made ancient Ostia
their Roman port. At the present time it has no inhabitants, but is a
group of complete ruins, with its streets of tombs, baths, palaces,
and temples, deeply covered with the accumulations of many centuries.
Enough excavations have been made along the shores of the Tiber at
this point to show that the river was bordered with continuous and
substantial masonry quays, flanked on the land side by successions of
great warehouses, obviously designed to receive grain, wine, oil, and
other products of the time. The entrance to this harbor was difficult,
as the mouth of the river was shallow, with bars apparently obstructing
its approach. There were no jetties, or other seaward works for the
protection of vessels desiring to make the harbor. It is stated that
during one storm nearly or quite two hundred vessels were destroyed
while they were actually in the harbor.

=49. Harbors of Claudius and Trajan.=—The difficulty in entering the
mouth of the Tiber prompted the emperor Claudius to construct another
harbor to accommodate the vast commerce then centring at the port of
Rome. Instead of increasing the capacity of Ostia and opening the mouth
of the river by deepening it, he constructed a new harbor on what was
then the seashore, a short distance from Ostia, and connected it with
the Tiber by a canal, the extension of which by the natural forces of
the river has become the Fiumicino, the only present navigable entrance
to the river. This harbor was enclosed by two walls stretching out
from the shore, and converging on the sea side to a suitable opening
left for the entrance of ships. The superficial area of this harbor
was about 175 acres, but it became insufficient during the time of
Trajan. He then proceeded to excavate inland a hexagonal harbor with
a superficial area of about 100 acres, which was connected both with
the harbor of Claudius and the canal connecting the latter with the
Tiber. These harbor-works were elaborate in their fittings for the
accommodation of ships, and were built most substantially of masonry.
They showed that at least in some branches of harbor-work the old
Romans were as good engineers as in the construction of aqueducts,
bridges, and other internal public works. The harbors at ancient
Ostia, including those of Claudius and Trajan, were not the only works
of their class constructed by the Romans, but they are sufficient to
show as great advancement in harbor and dock work as in other lines of
engineering.

These harbors were practically defenceless and exposed to the
incursions of pirates, which came to be frequently and successfully
made in the days of the declining power of Rome. It was therefore
rather early in the Christian era that these attacks discouraged, and
ultimately drove away, first, the maritime business of the Romans and,
subsequently, all the inhabitants of these ports, leaving the pillaged
remnants of the vast harbor-works, warehouses, palaces, temples, and
other buildings in the ruined condition in which they are now found.




CHAPTER V.


=50. Ancient Engineering Science.=—The state of what may be called the
philosophy or science of engineering construction in ancient Rome is
admirably illustrated by the work on Architecture by Marcus Vitruvius
Pollio, who is ordinarily known as Vitruvius, and who wrote probably a
little more than two thousand years ago. He calls himself an architect,
and his work is a classic in that profession of which he claims to be
a member. Although much of his work was purely architectural, a great
portion of it, on the other hand, was not architecture as we now know
it, but civil-engineering in the best sense of the term. It must be
remembered, therefore, that what is here written applies to that large
portion of his work which is purely civil-engineering.

It will be seen that although he understood really little or nothing
about the science of civil-engineering as we now comprehend it, he
perceived many of the general and fundamental principles of the best
practice of that profession and frequently applied them in a manner
which would do credit to a modern civil engineer. He not only laid
down axioms to govern the design of civil-engineering structures and
machinery for the transmission of power, but he also set forth many
considerations bearing upon public and private health and the practice
of sanitary engineering in a way that was highly creditable to the
state of scientific knowledge in his day. Speaking of the general
qualifications of an architect, remembering that that word as he
understood it includes the civil engineer, he states: “An architect
should be ingenious, and apt in the acquisition of knowledge; ... he
should be a good writer, a skilful draughtsman, versed in geometry and
optics, expert at figures, acquainted with history, informed on the
principles of natural and moral philosophy, somewhat of a musician,
not ignorant of the sciences both of law and physics, nor of the
motions, laws, and relations to each other of the heavenly bodies.”
Again he adds: “Moral philosophy will teach the architect to be above
meanness in his dealings and to avoid arrogance; it will make him just,
compliant, and faithful to his employer; and, what is of the highest
importance, it will prevent avarice gaining an ascendency over him; for
he should not be occupied with the thoughts of filling his coffers, nor
with the desire of grasping everything in the shape of gain, but by
the gravity of his manners and a good character should be careful to
preserve his dignity.”

These quaint statements of the desirable qualities of a professional
man are worthy to be considered rules of good professional living at
this time fully as much as they were in the days of old Rome. His
esteem for his profession was evidently high, but not higher than the
value which every civil engineer should put upon his professional
life. The need of a general education for a civil engineer is greater
now even than in his day, although musical accomplishments need not
be considered as essential in modern engineering practice. That
qualification, it is interesting to observe in passing, was inserted by
Vitruvius in order to illustrate the wide range of engineering practice
in those days when the architect-engineer was called upon, among other
things, to construct catapults and other engines of war, in which
a nice adjustment of gut ropes was determined by the musical tones
emitted under the desired tension.

=51. Ancient Views of the Physical Properties of Materials.=—When it
is remembered that the chemical constitution of materials used in
engineering was absolutely unknown, that no quantitative determination
of physical qualities had been made, and that the first correct
conception of engineering science had yet to be acquired, it is
a matter of wonder that there had been attained the engineering
development evidenced both by ancient writings like those of Vitruvius
and great engineering works like those of Rome, in the Babylonian Plain
and in Egypt. In discussing the problem of water-supply, he mentions
that certain learned ancients, “physiologists and philosophers,
maintained that there are four elements—air, fire, water, and earth—and
that their mixture, according to the difference of the species,
formed a natural mode of different qualities. We must recollect that
not only from these elements are all things generated, but that they
can neither be nourished nor grow without their assistance.” This
view of the construction of material things was not conducive to a
clear comprehension of those physical laws which lie at the foundation
of engineering science, and it is absolutely essential that these
elementary considerations be kept constantly in view in considering the
engineering attainments of the Romans and other ancient peoples.

=52. Roman Civil Engineers Searching for Water.=—In ancient times, as
at present, it was very important in many cases to know where to look
for water, and how to make what might promise to be a successful search
for it. Vitruvius states that the sources of water for a supply may
easily be found “if the springs are open and flowing above ground.” If
the sources are not so evident, but are more obscure, he recommends
that “before sunrise one must lie down prostrate in the spot where he
seeks to find it, and, with his chin placed on the ground and fixed,
look around the place; for, the chin being fixed, the eye cannot range
upwards further than it ought and is confined to the level of the
place. Then where the vapors are seen curling together and rising into
the air, there dig, because those appearances are not discovered in dry
places.” This method of discovering water-supply would be considered
by modern engineers at least somewhat awkward as well as damp and
disagreeable in the early morning hours. It is not more fantastic,
however, or less philosophical than the use of the divining-rod, which
has been practised in modern times as well as ancient, and is used even
in some country districts at the present time.

Vitruvius does not forget that the local features, including both
those of soil and of an artificial character, may affect the quality
of the water and possibly make it dangerous. He, therefore, sets forth
general directions by which good potable water may be found and that
of a dangerous nature avoided. The necessity of distinguishing between
good and bad water was as present to his mind and to the minds of the
old Roman engineers as to civil engineers of the present day, but the
means for making a successful discrimination were crude and obviously
faulty, and very often unsuccessful. He set forth, what is well known,
that rain-water when collected from an uncontaminated atmosphere is
most wholesome, but proceeds to give reasons which would not now be
considered in the highest degree scientific.

In Chapter V of his Eighth Book there are described some “means of
judging water” so quaint and amusing that they may now well be quoted
even though no civil engineer would be bold enough to cite them in
modern hydraulic practice. He says: “If it be of an open and running
stream, before we lay it on, the shape of the limbs of the inhabitants
of the neighborhood should be looked to and considered. If they are
strongly formed, of fresh color, with sound legs and without blear
eyes, the supply is of good quality.” At another point he comes rather
closely to our modern requirements which look to the exclusion of
minute and elementary vegetable growths, when he says: “Moreover, if
the water itself, when in the spring, is limpid and transparent, and
the places over which it runs do not generate moss, nor reeds, nor
other filth be near it, everything about it having a clean appearance,
it will be manifest by these signs that such water is light and
exceedingly wholesome.”

=53. Locating and Designing Conduits.=—In treating of the manner
of conducting water in pipes or other conduits, he adverts to the
necessity of accurate levelling and the instruments that were used for
that purpose. The three instruments which he mentions as being used are
called the dioptra, the level (_libra aquaria_), and the chorobates,
the latter consisting of a rod about 20 feet in length, having two
legs at its extremities of equal length and at right angles to it.
Cross-pieces were fastened between the rod and the legs with vertical
lines accurately marked on them. These vertical lines were placed in
a truly vertical position by means of plumb-lines so that the top of
the rod was perfectly level, and the work could thus be made level in
reference to it.

In Rome the water was generally conducted either by means of open
channels, usually built in masonry for the purpose, or in lead pipes,
or in “earthen tubes.” Vitruvius states that the open channels should
be as solid as possible, and have a fall of not less than one half a
foot in 100 feet. The open channels were covered with an arch top, so
that the sun might be kept from striking the water. After bringing the
water to the city it was divided into three parts. One was for the
supply of pools and fountains, another for the supply of baths, and
a third for the supply of private houses. A charge was made for the
use of water for the pools, fountains, and baths, and in this way a
yearly revenue was obtained. A further charge was also made for the
water used in private houses, the revenue from which was applied for
the maintenance of the aqueduct which supplied the water. The treatment
to be given to the different soils, rocks, and other materials through
which the conduit was built which brought the supply to Rome is duly
set forth by Vitruvius, and he describes the conditions under which
tunnels were constructed. He also described the methods of classifying
the lead pipes through which water was conducted from the reservoirs
to the various points in the city after stating that they must be made
in lengths of not less than 10 feet. The sheets of lead employed in
the manufacture of the pipes he describes as ranging in width from 5
inches to 100 inches. The diameter of the pipe would obviously equal
very closely the width of the sheet divided by the ratio between the
circumference and the diameter of the corresponding circle.

=54. Siphons.=—He speaks of passing valleys in the construction of the
conduits by means of what we now call siphons, and prescribes a method
for relieving it of the accumulated air. In speaking of earthen tubes
or pipes he says that they are to be provided not less than 2 inches
thick and “tongued at one end so that they may fit into one another,”
the joints being coated with quicklime and oil. He further observes
that water conducted through earthen pipes is more wholesome than that
through lead, and that water conveyed in lead must be injurious because
from it white lead is obtained, which is said to be injurious to the
human system. Indeed the effects of lead-poisoning were recognized in
those early days, and its avoidance was attempted. In the digging of
wells he wisely states that “the utmost ingenuity and discrimination”
must be used in the examination of the conditions under which wells
were to be dug. He also appreciated the advantage of sedimentation,
for he advises that reservoirs be made in compartments so that, as the
water flows from one to another, sedimentation may take place and the
water be made more wholesome.

=55. Healthful Sites for Cities.=—In the location of cities, as well as
of private residences, Vitruvius lays down the general principle that
the greatest care should be taken to select sites which are healthy
and subject only to clean and sanitary surroundings. Marshy places and
those subject to fogs, especially those “charged with the exhalations
of the fenny animals,” are to be avoided. Apparently this reference to
“fenny animals” may have beneath it the fundamental idea of bacteria,
but that is not certain. The main point of all these directions for
the securing of sanitary conditions of living is that, so far as his
technical knowledge permitted him to go, he insists on the same class
of wholesome conditions that would be prescribed by a modern sanitary
engineer.

=56. Foundations of Structures.=—Similarly in Chapter V of his
First Book, on “Foundations of Walls and Towers,” Vitruvius shows a
realization of the principal conditions needful and requisite for
the suitable founding of heavy buildings. After a sanitary site for
a city is determined and one that can be put in communication with
other people “by good roads, and river or sea navigation for the
transportation of merchandise,” he proceeds to state that “foundations
should be carried down to solid bottom, if such can be found, and
that they should be built thereon of such thickness as may be
necessary for the proper support of that part of the wall standing
above the natural level of the ground. They should be of the soundest
workmanship, and materials of greater thickness than the walls above.”
Again, in speaking of the foundations supporting columns, he states:
“The intervals between the foundations brought up under the columns
should be either rammed down hard, or arched, so as to prevent the
foundation-piers from swerving. If solid ground cannot be come to,
and the ground be loose or marshy, the place must be excavated,
cleared, and either alder, olive, or oak piles, previously charred,
must be driven with a machine as close to each other as possible
and the intervals between the piles filled with ashes. The heaviest
foundations may be laid on such a base.” It is thus seen that pile
foundations were used by the Romans, and that the piles were driven
with a machine. It would be difficult to give sounder general rules of
practice even after more than two thousand years’ additional experience.

=57. Pozzuolana and Sand.=—Of all the materials which were useful to
the Romans in their various classes of construction, including the
foundations of roads, “pozzuolana” must have been the most useful,
and that which contributed more to the development of successful
construction in Rome than any other single agent. Vitruvius speaks
of it frequently and gives rules not only for the use of it in the
production of mortar and concrete, but also lays down at considerable
length the treatment which should be given to lime in order to produce
the best results. It was common, according to his statements, to use
two measures of “pozzuolana” with one of lime in order to obtain
a suitable cementing material. This mixture was used in varying
proportions with sand and gravel or broken stone to produce concrete.
He describes the various grades of sands to be found about Rome and the
manner of using them. The statement is made that sand should be free of
earth and that the best of it was such as to yield a “grating sound”
when “rubbed between the fingers.” This is certainly a good engineering
test of sand. He prefers pit-sand to either river- or sea-sand; indeed
throughout all his directions regarding this particular class of
construction his rules might be used at the present time with perfect
propriety.

=58. Lime Mortar.=—The old Romans had also discovered the advisability
of allowing lime to stand for a considerable period of time after
slaking. This insured the slaking of all those small portions which
were possibly a little hydraulic and therefore slaked very slowly. He
prescribes as a good proportion two parts of sand to one of lime, and
also mentions the proportion of three to one. He attempts to explain
the setting, as we term it, of lime, but his explanation in obscure
terms, involving qualities of the elements of fire and air, is not very
satisfactory.

=59. Roman Bricks according to Vitruvius.=—As is well known, the
Romans were good brick-makers, and they were well aware that bricks
made from “ductile and cohesive” “red or white chalky” earth were far
preferable to those made of more gravelly or sandy clay. The Roman
bricks were both sun-dried and kiln-burned.

=60. Roman Timber.=—Timber was a material much used by the Romans, and
the greater part of that which they used probably was grown in Italy,
although considerable quantities were imported from other localities.
Vitruvius writes in considerable detail concerning the selection of
timber while standing, as well as in reference to its treatment before
being used in structures. Like every material used by the old Romans
in construction, the various kinds and qualities of timber received
careful study from them, and they were by no means novices in the art
of producing the best results from those kinds of timber with which
they were familiar.

=61. The Rules of Vitruvius for Harbors.=—In Chapter XII of his Fifth
Book Vitruvius lays down certain general rules for the selection and
formation of harbors, and it is known that the Romans were familiar
with elaborate and effective harbor construction, as is shown by
that at Ostia. He appreciates that a natural harbor is one which has
“rocks or long promontories jutting out, which from the shape of the
place form curves or angles,” and that in such places “nothing more
is necessary than to construct portices and arsenals around them, or
passages to the markets.” He then proceeds to state that if such a
natural formation is not to be found, and that if “on one side there
is a more proper shore than on the other, by means of building or of
heaps of stones, a projection is run out, and in this the enclosures of
harbors are formed.” He then proceeds to explain how “pozzuolana” and
lime, in the proportion of two of the former to one of the latter, are
used in subaqueous construction. He also prescribed a mode of building
a masonry wall up from the bottom of an excavation made within what we
should call a coffer-dam, formed, among other things, “of oaken piles
tied together with chain pieces.” The Romans knew well how to select
harbors and how to construct in an effective manner the artificial
works connected with them, although it appears that the effects of
tidal and river currents in estuaries were neither well understood in
themselves nor in their transporting power of the solid material which
those currents eroded.

=62. The Thrusts of Arches and Earth; Retaining-walls and
Pavements.=—Although the Romans possessed little or no knowledge
of analytical mechanics they attained to some good qualitative
mechanical conceptions. Among other things they understood fairly
well the general character of the thrust of an arch and the tendency
of the earth to overthrow a retaining-wall. They knew that a massive
abutment was needed to receive safely the thrust of an arch, and they
counterforted or buttressed retaining-walls in order to hold them
firmly in place. They also realized the danger of wet earth pressing
against a retaining-wall, and even made a series of offsets or teeth
on the inside of the wall on which the earth rested in order to aid in
holding the wall in place. Vitruvius recommends as a safeguard against
the pressure of earth wet by winter rains that “the thickness of the
wall must be proportioned to the weight of earth against it,” and that
counterforts or buttresses be employed “at a distance from each other
equal to the height of the foundations, and of the same width as the
foundations,” the projections at the bottom being equal in thickness to
that of the wall, and diminishing toward the top.

He gives in considerable detail instructions for the forming of
pavements and stucco work, so many examples of which are still existing
in Rome. These rules are in many respects precisely the same as would
govern the construction of similar work at the present time. There are
also described in a general way the methods of producing white and
red lead, as pigments of paints, and a considerable number of other
pigments of different colors.

=63. The Professional Spirit of Vitruvius.=—It is evident, from many
passages in the writings of this Roman architect-engineer, that the
ways of the professional men in old Rome were not always such as led to
his peace of mind. Vitruvius utters bitter complaints which show that
he did not consider purely professional knowledge and service to be
adequately recognized or appreciated by his countrymen. He writes that
in the city of Ephesus an ancient law provided that if the cost of a
given work completed under the plans and specifications of an architect
did not exceed the estimate, he was commended “with decrees and
honors,” but if the cost exceeded the estimate with 25 per cent added
thereto, he “was required to pay that excess out of his own pocket.”
Then he exclaims, “Would to God that such a law existed among the Roman
people, not only in respect to their public but also to their private
buildings, for then the unskilful could not commit their depredations
with impunity, and those who were the most skilful in the intricacies
of the art would follow the profession!”

=64. Mechanical Appliances of the Ancients.=—It is well known that the
ancients possessed at least some simple types of machines, for the
reason that they raised many great stones to a considerable height in
completed works after having transported them great distances from the
quarries whence they were taken. Undoubtedly these machines were of a
simple and crude character and were made effective largely by the power
of great numbers of men. We are not acquainted with all the details
of these machines, although the general types are fairly well known.
The elementary machines, including the lever, the inclined plane, the
pulley, and the screw, which is only an application of the inclined
plane, were all used not only by the Romans, but probably by every
civilized ancient nation. Vitruvius describes a considerable number of
these machines, and from his descriptions it is clear that they had
wide application in the structural works of the Romans. The block and
fall, as we term the pulley at the present time, was a common machine
in the plant of a Roman constructor, as were also various modifications
and applications of the lever, the roller, and the inclined plane.

=65. Unlimited Forces and Time.=—It is neither surprising nor very
remarkable that with the use of these simple machines, aided by a
practically unlimited number of men, the necessary raising or other
movement of heavy weights was accomplished by the Romans and other
ancient peoples. It is to be borne in mind that the element of time was
of far less consequence in those days than at present, and that the
rate of progress made in the construction of most if not all ancient
engineering works was what we should consider intolerably slow.




PART II.

_BRIDGES._




CHAPTER VI.


=66. Introductory.=—Although the bridge structures of to-day serve the
same general purposes as those served by the most ancient structures,
they are very different engineering products. It is not long, in
comparison with the historic and prehistoric periods during which
bridges have been built, since the science of mechanics has been
sufficiently developed to make bridge design a rational procedure; and
it is scarcely more than a century since the principles of mechanics
were first applied to the design of bridge structures in such a way as
to determine even approximately the amount of stress produced in any
member by the imposed load. Naturally the first efforts made toward a
truly rational bridge design were in fact simple and crude and only
loosely approximate in their results. Probably the first analytic
treatment of bridges was given to the design of arches in masonry and
then in cast-iron. As the action of forces in structures became better
known through the development of mechanical science, the applications
of the latter became less crude and approximate and the approach to the
refined accuracy of the present day was begun.

=67. First Cast-iron Arch.=—These older structures, nearly all of them
arches or more or less related to the arch, first appeared in cast-iron
in the latter part of the eighteenth century, when nothing like an
accurate analysis of forces developed by the application of a given
load was known. The first cast-iron arch was erected over the Severn
in England near Coalbrookdale in the year 1779. This bridge had a
span of 100 feet, and the under surface of the arch or soffit at the
crown was 45 feet above the points at the abutment from which the arch
sprang, or, as civil engineers put it, the arch had a span of 100 feet
and a rise or versine of 45 feet. Other cast-iron arches were built in
England soon after.

=68. Early Timber Bridges in America.=—Timber bridges have been built
since the earliest historic periods and even earlier, but the widest
and boldest applications of timber to bridge structures have been made
in this country, beginning near the end of the eighteenth century and
running to the middle of the nineteenth century, when timber began to
be displaced by iron. Timber bridges and those of combined iron and
timber are built to some extent even at the present day, but the most
extended work of this class is to be found in the period just named.

In 1660 what was called the “Great Bridge” was built across the
Charles River near Boston, and was a structure on piles. Other similar
structures followed, but the first long-span timber bridge, where
genuine bridge trussing or framing was used, appears to have been
completed in 1792, when Colonel William P. Riddle constructed the
Amoskeag Bridge across the Merrimac River at Manchester, N. H., in
six spans of a little over 92 feet from centre to centre of piers.
From that time timber bridges, mostly on the combined arch and truss
principle, were built, many of them examples of remarkably excellent
engineering structures for their day. Among these the most prominent
were the Bellows Falls Bridge, in two spans of 184 feet each from
centre to centre of piers, over the Connecticut River, built in 1785-92
by Colonel Enoch Hale; the Essex-Merrimac Bridge over the Merrimac
River, three miles above Newburyport, Mass., built by Timothy Palmer
in 1792, consisting actually of two bridges with Deer Island between
them, the principal feature of each being a kind of arched truss of 160
feet span on one side of the island and 113 feet span on the other;
the Piscataqua Bridge, seven miles above Portsmouth, N. H., in which
a “stupendous arch of 244 feet cord is allowed to be a masterly piece
of architecture, planned and built by the ingenious Timothy Palmer of
Newburyport, Mass.,” in 1794; the so-called “Permanent Bridge” over
the Schuylkill River at Philadelphia, built in 1804-06 in two arches
of 150 feet and one of 195 feet, all in the clear, after the design
of Timothy Palmer; the Waterford Bridge over the Hudson River, built
in 1804 by Theodore Burr, in four combined arch and truss spans, one
of 154 feet, one of 161 feet, one of 176 feet, and the fourth of 180
feet, all in the clear; the Trenton Bridge, built in 1804-06 over
the Delaware River at Trenton, N. J., by Theodore Burr, in five arch
spans of the bowstring type, ranging from 161 feet to 203 feet in the
clear; a remarkable kind of wooden suspension bridge built by Theodore
Burr in 1808 across the Mohawk River at Schenectady, N. Y., in spans
ranging in length from 157 feet to 190 feet; the Susquehanna Bridge at
Harrisburg, Pa., built by Theodore Burr in 1812-16 in twelve spans of
about 210 feet each; the so-called Colossus Bridge, built in 1812 by
Lewis Wernwag over the Schuylkill River at Fairmount, Pa., with a clear
span of 340 feet 3¾ inches; the New Hope Bridge, built in 1814 over the
Delaware River, in six 175 feet combined arch and truss spans, and a
considerable number of others built by the same engineer.

Some of these wooden bridges, like those at Easton, Pa., and at
Waterford, N. Y., remained in use for over ninety years with only
ordinary repairs and with nearly all of the timber in good condition.
In such cases the arches and trusses have been housed and covered
with boards, so as to make what has been commonly called a covered
bridge. The curious timber suspension bridge built by Theodore Burr
at Schenectady was used twenty years as originally built, but its
excessive deflection under loads made it necessary to build up a pier
under the middle of each span so as to support the bridge structure
at those points. These bridges were all constructed to carry highway
traffic, but timber bridges to carry railroad traffic were subsequently
built on similar plans, except that Burr’s plan of wooden suspension
bridge at Schenectady was never repeated.

[Illustration: MOHAWK BRIDGE AT SCHENECTADY N.Y.

Built by Theodore Burr.

FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: PATENT BRIDGE “COLOSSUS”

Across the River Schuylkill at Philadelphia.

Single Arch 340 feet 3¾ inches.

Built by Lewis Wernwag.

FIG. 2.]

=69. Town Lattice Bridge.=—A later type of timber bridge which was
most extensively used in this country was invented by Ithiel Town in
January, 1820, which was known as the Town lattice bridge. This timber
bridge was among those used for railroad structures. As shown by the
plan it was composed of a close timber lattice, heavy plank being used
as the lattice members, and they were all joined by wooden pins at
their intersections. This type of timber structure was comparatively
common not longer ago than twenty-five years, and probably some
structures of its kind are still in use. The close latticework with its
many pinned intersections made a very safe and strong frame-work, and
it enjoyed deserved popularity. It was the forerunner in timber of the
modern all-riveted iron and steel lattice truss. It is of sufficient
significance to state, in connection with the Town lattice, that its
inventor claimed that his trusses could be made of wrought or cast-iron
as well as timber. In many cases timber arches were combined with them.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

=70. Howe Truss.=—The next distinct advance made in the development
of bridge construction in the United States was made by brevet
Lieutenant-Colonel Long of the Corps of Engineers, U.S.A., in 1830-39,
and by William Howe, who patented the bridge known as the Howe
truss, although the structure more lately known under that name is a
modification of Howe’s original truss. Long’s truss was entirely of
timber, including the keys, pins, or treenails required, and it was
frequently built in combination with the wooden arch. The truss was
considerably used, but it was not sufficiently popular to remain in
use.

[Illustration: Howe Truss-Bridge.]

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

The Howe truss was not an all-wooden bridge. The top and bottom
horizontal members, known as “chords,” the inclined braces between
them and the vertical end braces, all connecting the two chords, were
of timber, and they were bolted at all intersections; but the vertical
braces were of round iron with screw ends. These rods extended through
both chords and received nuts at both ends pressing on cast-iron
washers through which the rods extended. These wrought-iron round rods
were in groups at each panel-point, numbering as many as existing
stresses required. The ends of the timber braces abutted against
cast-iron joint-boxes. The railroad floor was carried on heavy timber
ties running entirely across the bridge and resting upon the lower
chord members. It was a structure simple in character, easily framed,
and of materials readily secured. It was also easily erected and could
quickly be constructed for any reasonable length of span. It possessed
so many merits that it became widely adopted and is used in modified
form at the present day, particularly on lines where the first cost
of construction must be kept as low as possible. The large amount of
timber in it and the simple character of its wrought-iron or steel
members greatly reduces its first cost.

=71. Pratt Truss.=—In 1844 the two Pratts, Thomas W. and Caleb,
patented the truss, largely of timber, which has since been perpetuated
in form by probably the largest number of iron and steel spans ever
constructed on a single type. The original Pratt trusses had timber
upper and lower chords, but the vertical braces were also made of
timber instead of iron, while the inclined braces were of round
wrought-iron with screw ends, the reverse of the web arrangement in the
Howe type. This truss had the great advantage of making the longest
braces (of iron) resist tension only, while the shorter vertical braces
resist compression. As a partially timber bridge it could not compete
with the Howe truss, because it contained materially more iron and
consequently was more costly. This structure practically closed the
period of development of timber bridges.

=72. Squire Whipple’s Work.=—What amounted to a new epoch in the
development of bridge construction in this country practically began
in 1840 when Squire Whipple built his first bowstring truss with
wrought-iron tension and cast-iron compression members. While the
Pratts and Howe had begun to employ to some extent the analysis of
stresses in the design of their bridge members, the era of exact bridge
analysis began with Squire Whipple. He subjected his bridge designs to
the exacting requirements of a rational analysis, and to him belongs
the honor of placing the design of bridges upon the firm foundation of
a systematic mathematical analysis.

=73. Character of Work of Early Builders.=—The names of Palmer, Burr,
and Wernwag were connected with an era of admirable engineering works,
but, with bridge analysis practically unknown, and with the simplest
and crudest materials at their disposal, their resources were largely
constituted of an intuitive engineering judgment of high quality and
remarkable force in the execution of their designs never excelled in
American engineering. They occasionally made failures, it is true,
but it is not recorded that they ever made the same error twice, and
the works which they constructed form a series of precedents which
have made themselves felt in the entire development of American
bridge-building.




CHAPTER VII.


=74. Modern Bridge Theory.=—The evolution of bridge design having
reached that point where necessity of accurate analysis began to make
itself felt, it is necessary to recognize some of the fundamental
theoretical considerations which lie at the base of modern bridge
theory, and which involve to a considerable extent that branch of
engineering science known as the elasticity or strength of the
materials used in engineering construction.

The entire group of modern bridge structures may be divided into simple
beams or girders, trusses, arches, suspension bridges, and arched ribs,
each class being adapted to carry either highway or railway traffic.
That class of structure known as beams or girders is characterized by
very few features. There are solid beams like those of timber, with
square or rectangular cross-sections, and the so-called flanged girders
which are constituted of two horizontal pieces, one at the top and the
other at the bottom, connected by a vertical plate running the entire
length of the beam. The fundamental theory is identically the same for
both and is known as the “common theory of flexure,” i.e., the theory
of beams carrying loads.

If an ordinary scantling or piece of timber of square or rectangular
cross-section, like a plank or a timber joist, so commonly used for
floors, be supported at each end, it is a matter of common observation
that it will sustain an amount of load depending upon the dimensions
of the stick and length of span. When such a bar or piece is loaded
certain forces or stresses, as they are called, are brought into action
in its interior. The word “stress” is used simply to indicate a force
that exists in the interior of any piece of material. It is a force and
nothing else. It is treated and analyzed in every way precisely as a
force. If the stresses or forces set up by the loading in the interior
of the bar become greater than the material can resist, it begins to
break, and the breaking of that portion of the timber in which the
stresses or forces are greatest constitutes its failure. The load which
produces this failure in a beam is called the breaking load of the
beam. In engineering practice all beams are so designed or proportioned
that the greatest load placed on them shall be only a safe percentage
of the breaking load; the safe load usually being found between ⅓ and ⅙
of the breaking load. In most buildings the safe or working load, as it
is called, is probably about ¼ of the breaking load.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

=75. The Stresses in Beams.=—The proper design of beams or girders to
carry prescribed loads is based upon the stresses which are developed
or brought into action by them. It can easily be observed that if a
beam supported at each end be composed of a number of thin planks or
boards placed one upon the other, it will carry very little load. Each
plank or board acts independently of the others and a very small load
will cause a sag, as shown in Fig. 6. If there be taken, on the other
hand, a beam made of a single stick of timber of the same width and
depth as the number of planks shown in Fig. 6, so as to secure the
solid beam shown in Fig. 7, it is a further common observation that
this latter beam may carry many times the load which the laminated
beam, shown in Fig. 6, sustains. The thin planks or boards readily
slide over each other, so that the ends present the serrated form
shown in Fig. 6. The preventing of this sliding is the sole cause of
the greatly increased stiffness of the solid beam shown in Fig. 7, for
there is thus developed along the imaginary horizontal sections in the
solid beam of Fig. 7 what are called shearing forces or stresses; and
since they exist on horizontal sections or planes running throughout
the entire length of the beam, they are called horizontal shears.

At each end of the beam shown in Fig. 7 there will be an upward or
supporting force exerted by the abutments on which the ends of the beam
rest. Those upward or supporting forces are shown at _R_ and _R′_ and
are called reactions, because the abutments, so to speak, react against
the ends of the beam when the latter is loaded. These reactions depend
for their value on the amount and the location of the loading which the
beam carries. Obviously these upward forces or reactions tend to cut or
shear off the ends of the beam immediately above them, and if the loads
were sufficiently large and the beam kept from bending, the reactions
would actually shear off those ends, just as punches or shears in
a machine-shop actually shear off the metal when the rivet-hole is
punched, or when a plate is cut by shearing into two parts. The beam,
however, bends or sags before shearing apart actually takes place.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

=76. Vertical and Horizontal Shearing Stresses.=—If it be supposed
that the length of the beam is divided into a great number of parts by
imaginary vertical lines, like those shown in Fig. 8, then vertical
shearing forces will be developed in those vertical planes and
sometimes, though not often, they are enough to cause failure. It is
not an uncommon thing, on the other hand, in timber to have actual
shearing failure take place along a horizontal plane through the centre
of the beam. Indeed this is recognized frequently as the principal
method of failure in very short spans. When this horizontal shearing
failure takes place, the upper and lower parts of the beam slide over
each other and act precisely like the group of planks shown in Fig. 6.

If, then, the loaded beam be divided by vertical and horizontal planes
into the small rectangular portions shown in Figs. 8 and 9, on each
such vertical and horizontal imaginary plane there will be respectively
vertical and horizontal shearing forces, which are shown by arrows in
Fig. 9. It will be noticed in that figure that in each corner of the
rectangle the two shearing forces act either toward or from each other;
in no case do the two adjacent shearing forces act around the rectangle
in the same direction. This is a condition of shearing stresses
peculiar to the bent beam. It can be demonstrated by theory and is
confirmed by experiment. There is a further peculiarity about these
shearing forces which act in pairs either toward or from the same angle
in any rectangle, and it is that the two stresses adjacent to each
other have precisely the same value per square inch (or any square unit
that may be used) of the surface on which they act. These stresses per
square inch vary, however, either along the length of the beam or as
the centre line of any normal cross-section is departed from. They are
greatest along the centre line or central horizontal plane represented
by _AB_, and they are zero at the top and bottom surfaces of the beam.

Inasmuch as the horizontal shear along the plane _AʹBʹ_ is less than
that along _AB_ in Fig. 9, a part of the latter has been taken up by
the horizontal fibres of the beam lying between the two planes. In
other words, the horizontal layer of fibres at _AʹBʹ_ is subjected to a
greater stress or force along its length than at _AB_. The same general
observation can be made in reference to any horizontal layer of fibres
that is farther away from the centre than another. Hence the farther
any fibre is from the centre the greater will be the stress or force
to which it is subjected in the direction of its length. It results,
then, that the horizontal layers of fibres which are farthest from the
centre line of the beam, i.e., those at the exterior surfaces, will be
subjected to the greatest force or stress, and that is precisely what
exists in a loaded beam whatever the material may be.

=77. Law of Variation of Stresses of Tension and Compression.=—Since
a horizontal beam supported at each end is deflected or bent downward
when loaded, it will take a curved form like that shown in either Fig.
7 or Fig. 10; but this deflection can only take place by the shortening
of the top of the beam and the lengthening of its bottom. This shows
that the upper part of the beam is compressed throughout its entire
length, while the lower part is stretched. In engineering language,
it is stated that the upper part of the beam is thus subjected to
compression and the lower part to tension. The horizontal layers
or fibres receive their tension and compression from the vertical
and horizontal shearing forces in the manner already explained. If
the conditions of loading of the bent beam should be subjected to
mathematical analysis, it would be found that throughout the originally
horizontal plane _AB_, Fig. 7, passing through the centre of each
section there would be no stress of either tension or compression,
although the horizontal shearing stress there would be a maximum.
Further, as this central plane is departed from the stress of tension
or compression per square inch in any vertical section would be found
to increase directly as the distance from it. This is a very simple
law, but one of the greatest importance in the design of all beams
and girders, whatever may be the form or size of cross-section. It
is a law, which applies equally to the solid timber beam and to the
flanged steel girder, whether that girder be rolled in the mill or
built up of plates and angles or other sections in the shop. It is a
fundamental law of what is called the common theory of flexure, and
is the very foundation of all beam and girder design. The horizontal
plane represented by the line _AB_ in Fig. 8, along which there is
neither tension nor compression, is called the “neutral plane,” and its
intersection with any normal cross-section of the beam is called the
“neutral axis” of that section. Mathematical analysis shows that the
neutral plane passes through the centres of gravity of all the normal
sections of the beam and, hence, that the neutral axis passes through
the passes through the centre of gravity of the section to which it
belongs.

=78. Fundamental Formulæ of Theory of Beams.=—The fundamental formulæ
of the theory of loaded beams may be quite simply written. Fig. 10
exhibits in a much exaggerated manner a bent beam supporting any
system of loads _W₁_, _W₂_, _W₃_, etc., while Fig. 11 shows a normal
cross-section of the same beam. In Fig. 10 _AB_ is the neutral line,
and in Fig. 11 _CD_ is the neutral axis passing through the centre of
gravity, _c.g._, of the section.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.]

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

If _a_ is the amount of force or stress on a square inch (or other
square unit), i.e., the intensity of stress, at the distance of unity
from the neutral axis _CD_ of the section, then, by the fundamental
law already stated, the amount acting on another square inch at any
other distance _z_ from the neutral axis will be _az_. This quantity
is called the “intensity of stress” (tension or compression) at the
distance _z_ from the neutral axis. Evidently it has its greatest
values in the extreme fibres of the section, i.e., _ad_ and _ad_₁. At
the neutral axis _az_ becomes equal to zero. _FG_ in Fig. 11 represents
the same line as _FG_ in Fig. 10. If the line _FH_ in Fig. 11 be laid
down equal to _ad_ and at right angles to _FG_, and if _O_ represent
the centre of gravity, _c.g._, of the section, then let the straight
line _LH_ be drawn. Any line drawn parallel to _FH_ from _FG_ to _LH_
will represent the intensity of stress in the corresponding part of the
beam’s cross-section. Obviously, as these lines are drawn in opposite
directions from _FG_, those above _O_ will indicate stress of one kind,
and those below that point stress of another kind, i.e., if that above
be tension, that below will be compression. It can be demonstrated by a
simple process that the total tension on one side of the neutral axis
is just equal to the total compression on the other side, and from that
condition it follows that the neutral axis must pass through the centre
of gravity or centroid of the section.

Returning to the left-hand portion of Fig. 11, let _dA_ represent a
very small portion of the cross-section; then will _az. dA_ be the
amount of stress acting on it. The moment of this stress or force about
the neutral axis will be

    _azdA·z = az²·dA_.

If this expression be applied to every small portion of the entire
section, the aggregate or total sum of the small moments so found will
be the moment of all the stresses in the section about the neutral
axis. That moment will have the value

    _M_ = ⌠_az²·dA_ = _a_⌠_z²·dA_ = _aI_.      (1)
          ⌡              ⌡

In equation (1) the symbol ∫ means that the sum of all the small
quantities to the right of it is taken, and _I_ stands for that sum
which, in the science of mechanics, is called the moment of inertia of
the cross-section about its neutral axis. The value of the quantity
_I_ may easily be computed for all forms of section. Numerical values
belonging to all the usual forms employed in engineering practice
are found in extended tables in the handbooks of the large iron and
steel companies of the country, so that its use ordinarily involves no
computations of its value.

Equation (1) may readily be changed into two other forms for
convenient practical use. In Fig. 10 _mn_ is supposed to be a very
short portion of the centre line of the beam represented by _dl_.
Before the beam is bent the section _FG_ is supposed to have the
position _MN_ parallel to _PQ_. Also let _u_ be the small amount of
stretching or compression (shortening) of a unit’s length of fibre at
unit’s distance from the centre line _AB_ of the beam, then will _udl_
and _uzdl_ be the short lines parallel to _GN_ in the triangle _GmN_
shown in the figure. The point _C_ is the centre of curvature of the
line _mn_, and _Cn = Cm_ is the radius. The two triangles _Cnm_ and
_mNG_ are therefore similar, hence

    _udl_     _mn_    _dl_            I
    ------- = ---- = -----     ∴ u = ---.      (2)
       I       ρ       ρ              ρ

If the quantity called the coefficient or modulus of elasticity be
represented by _E_, then, by the fundamental law of the theory of
elasticity in solid bodies,

    _a = Eu_.      (3)

As has already been shown, the greatest stresses (intensities) in the
section are +_ad_ (tension) and -_ad_₁ (compression). If _K_ represent
that greatest intensity of stress, then

                         _K_
    _K = ad_, and _a_ = ----.      (4)
                         _d_

If the value of _a_ from equation (4) be substituted in equation (1),

          _KI_
    _M_ = -----.      (5)
          _d_

=79. Practical Applications.=—Equation (5) is a formula constantly
used in engineering practice. All quantities in the second member are
known in any given case. _K_ is prescribed in the specifications,
and is known as the “working resistance” in the design of beams and
girders. For rolled steel beams in buildings it is frequently taken at
16,000 pounds, i.e., 16,000 pounds per square inch, about one fourth
the breaking strength of the steel. In railroad-bridge work it may be
found between 10,000 and 12,000 pounds, or approximately one fifth of
the breaking strength of the steel. The quantities _I_ and _d_ depend
upon the form and dimensions of the cross-section, and are either known
or may be determined. The quotient _I ÷ d_ is now known as the “section
modulus,” and its numerical values for all forms of rolled beams can
be found in published tables. The use of equation (5) is therefore in
the highest degree convenient and practicable.

=80. Deflection.=—It is frequently necessary, both in the design of
beams and framed bridges, to ascertain how much the given loading will
cause the beam or truss to sag, or, in engineering language, to deflect
below the position occupied when unloaded. The deflection is determined
by the sagging in the vertical plane of the neutral line below its
position when the structure carries no load. In Fig. 10 the curved line
_AB_ is the neutral line of the beam when supporting loads. If the
loads should be removed, the line _AB_ would return to a horizontal
position. The line drawn horizontally through _A_ and indicated by _x_
is the position of the centre line of the beam before being bent. The
vertical distance _w_ below this horizontal line shows the amount by
which the point at the end of the line _x_ is dropped in consequence of
the flexure of the beam. The vertical distance _w_ is therefore called
the deflection. Evidently the deflection varies with the amount of
loading and with the distance from the end of the beam. The curved line
_AB_ in one special case only is a circle. The general character of
that curve is determined by the loading and the length of span.

In order that the deflection may be properly considered it is necessary
that the relation between _x_ and _w_ shall be established for all
conditions of loading and length of span. If the value of _u_ from
equation (2) be placed in equation (3), there will result

          _E_
    _a_ = ---.      (6)
           ρ

If the value of _a_ from equation (6) be substituted in the last member
of equation (1), there will at once result

          _EI_
    _M_ = ----.      (7)
            ρ

It is established by a very simple process in differential calculus that

     _I     d²w_
    ---- = ------.      (8)
      ρ      dx²

Hence, substituting from equation (8) in equation (7),

             _d²w_
    _M = EI_ -----.      (9)
             _dx²_

Equation (9) may be used by means of some very simple operations in
integral calculus to determine the value of _w_ in terms of _x_ and the
loads on the beam when the value of the bending moment _M_ is known,
and the procedures for determining that quantity will presently be
given.

Using the processes of the calculus, the two following equations will
immediately be found:

    _dw_     1
    ----- = ---- ⌠ _Mdx_;        (10)
    _dx      EI_ ⌡


          1
    _w = ----- ⌠⌠ Mdx²_          (11)
         _EI_  ⌡⌡

As already explained, numerical values for both _E_ and _I_ may be
taken at once from tables already prepared for all materials and for
all shapes of beams ordinarily employed in structural work, so that
equation (11) enables the deflection or sag of the bent beam to be
computed in any case. The expression _dw/dx_ is the tangent of the
angle made by the neutral line of a bent beam with a horizontal line at
any given point, and it is a quantity that it is sometimes necessary to
determine. _dw_ and _dx_ are indefinitely short vertical and horizontal
lines respectively, as shown immediately to the left of _B_ in Fig. 10.

Equation (11) is not used in structural work nearly as much as equation
(5), but both of them are of practical value and involve only simple
operations in their use.

=81. Bending Moments and Shears with Single Load.=—The second members
of equations (5) and (9) exhibit values of the moments of the internal
forces or stresses in any normal cross-section of a bent beam about the
neutral axis of the section, while the values of _M_ must be expressed
in terms of the external forces or loading. Inasmuch as the latter
moment develops just the internal moment, it is obvious that the two
must be equal. In order to write the value of the external moment in
terms of any loading, it is probably the simplest procedure to consider
a beam carrying a single load. In Fig. 12, _AB_ is such a beam, and
_W_ is a load which may be placed anywhere in the span, whose length
is _l_. The distances of the load from the abutments are represented
by _x_₁ and _x_₂. The reactions or supporting forces exerted under
the ends of the beam at the abutments are shown by _R_ and _R′_. The
reactions, determined by the simple law of the lever, are

            _x₂                x₁_
    _R = W_ ---- and _Rʹ = W_ ----        (12)
           _l                  l_

The greatest bending moment in the beam will occur at the point of
application of the load, and its value will be

                    _x₁x₂_
    _M₁ = Rx₁ = W_ ------- = -_Rʹx₂_.      (13)
                     _l_

[Illustration:

                          _Wx₁x₂_
    _M₁ = Rx₁ =  -Rʹx₂_ = -------
                            _l_

FIG. 12.]

The bending moments at the end of the beam are obviously zero, and
the second and fourth members of equation (13) show that the moment
increases directly as the distance from either end. Hence in the
lower portion of Fig. 12, at _D_, immediately under the load _W_, the
line _DC_ is laid off at any convenient scale to represent the moment
_M_₁. The straight lines _AC_ and _CB_ are then drawn. Any vertical
intercept, as _FH_ or _KL_, between _AB_ and either _AC_ or _CB_ will
represent the bending moment at the corresponding point in the beam.
The simple triangular diagram _ACB_ therefore represents the complete
condition of bending of the beam under the single load _W_ placed at
any point in the span.

The beam _AB_ is supposed for the moment to have no weight.
Consequently the only force acting upon the portion of the beam _AO_
is the reaction _R_, and, similarly, _Rʹ_ is the only force acting
upon the portion _OB_. Obviously so far as the simple action of these
two forces or reactions is concerned, the tendency of each is to cause
vertical slices of the beam, so to speak, to slide over each other. In
other words, in engineering language, the portion _AO_ of the beam is
subjected to the shear _S = R_, while _OB_ is subjected to the shear
_Sʹ = -Rʹ_. The cross-sectional area of the beam must be sufficient to
resist the shear _S_ or _Sʹ_. The upper part of Fig. 13 shaded with
broken vertical lines indicates this condition of shear. It is evident
from this simple case that the total vertical shears at the ends of any
beam will be the reactions or supporting forces exerted at those ends,
and that each will remain constant for the adjoining portion of the
beam.

The third member of equation (13) shows that the greatest bending
moment _M_₁ in the beam varies as the product _x_₁_x_₂ of the segments
of the span. That product will have its greatest value when _x_₁ =
_x_₂. Hence _a simple beam loaded by a single weight will be subjected
to the greatest possible bending moment when the weight is placed at
the middle of the span, at which point also that moment will be found_.

=82. Bending Moments and Shears with any System of Loads.=—The general
case of a simple beam loaded with any system of weights whatever may
be represented in Fig. 13, in which the beam of Fig. 12 is supposed to
carry three loads, _w_₁, _w_₂, _w_₃. The spacing of the loads is as
shown. The reactions or supporting forces _Rʹ_ are determined precisely
as in Fig. 12, each reaction in this case being the resultant of three
loads instead of one. Applying the law of the lever as before, the
reaction _R_ will have the value

           _d       d + c       d + c + b_
    _R = W₃--- + W₂------- + W₁-----------_.      (14)
           _l         l            l_

A similar value may be written for _Rʹ_, but it is probably simpler,
after having found one reaction, to write

    _R′ = W₁ + W₂ + W₃ - R_.      (15)

As the beam is supposed to have no weight, no load will act upon the
beam between the given weights. The bending moments at the points of
application of the three weights or loads will be

    _M₁_ = _Ra_,                                   }
    _M₂_ = _R_(_a + b_) - _W₁b_,                   }      (16)
    _M₃_ = _R_(_a + b + c_) - _W₁_(_b + c_) - W₂c_.}

After substituting the value of _R_ from equation (14) in equations
(16) the values of the latter are at once known.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

The bending produced by each weight will also be represented precisely
like that in Fig. 12. The triangle _ANB_ represents the bending
produced by _W_₁; _AOB_ the bending produced by _W_₂; and _APB_ the
bending produced by _W_₃. The resultant bending effect produced by the
three loads or weights acting simultaneously is simply the summation
of the three effects each due to a single load. Hence _DC_ is erected
vertically through the point of application of _W_₁, so as to equal
_DN_ added to the two vertical intercepts between _AB_ and _AP_, and
_AB_ and _AO_. Similarly, _HF_ is equal to _HO_ added to the intercepts
between _AB_ and _AP_, and _AB_ and _BN_. Finally, _KL_ is equal to
_PL_ added to the other two intercepts, one between _AB_ and _BN_,
and the other between _AB_ and _BO_. Straight lines then are drawn
through _A_, _C_, _F_, _K_, and _B_. Any vertical intercept between
_AB_ and _ACFKB_ will represent the bending moment in the beam at the
corresponding point. Obviously any number of loads of any magnitude, or
a uniform load, may be treated in precisely the same way.

An important practical rule can readily be deduced from the equations
(16), each one of which may be regarded as a general equation of
moments. If the system of three, or any other number of loads, be moved
a small distance Δ_x_, while they all remain separated by the same
distances as before, the bending moment _M_ will be changed by the
amount shown in equation (16_a_):

    _ΔM = RΔx - W₁Δx - W₂Δx -_ etc.      (16_a_)

If the notation of the differential calculus be used by writing the
letter _d_ instead of Δ, and if both members of equation (16_a_) be
then divided by _dx_, equation (16_b_) will result:

    _ΔM    dM_
    --- = ---- = _R - W₁ - W₂_ - etc. = shear.      (16_b_)
    _Δx    dx_

The second member of this equation shows the sum of all the external
forces acting on one portion of the beam, that portion being limited
by the section about which the moment _M_ acts. That sum of all the
external forces, as given by the second member of equation (16_b_),
is evidently the total transverse shear at the section considered.
Equation (16_b_) then shows, in the language of the differential
calculus, that the first derivative of _M_ in respect to _x_ is
equal to the total transverse shear. It is further established in
the differential calculus that whenever a function, such as _M_, the
bending moment, is a maximum or a minimum, the first derivative is
equal to zero. The application of this principle to equation (16_b_)
shows that the bending moment in any beam or truss has its greatest
value wherever the shear is zero. Hence, in order to determine at what
section the bending moment has its greatest value in any loaded beam
carrying a given system of loads, it is only necessary to sum up all
the forces or loads, including the reaction _R_, on that beam from one
end to the point where that sum or shear is zero; at this latter point
the greatest moment sought will be found. This is a very simple method
of determining the section at which the greatest moment in the beam
exists.

The preceding formulæ and diagrams may be extended to include any
number of loads, and they are constantly used in engineering practice,
not only for beams and girders in buildings, but also for bridges
carrying railroad trains. Whatever may be the number of loads,
the expressions for the bending moments at the various points of
application of those loads are to be written precisely as indicated in
equations (16). When the number of loads becomes great the number of
terms in the equations correspondingly increase, but in reality they
are just as simple as those for a smaller number of loads.

The diagram for the vertical shear in this beam is the lower part of
Fig. 13. As in the case of Fig. 12 the shear at _A_ is the reaction
_R_, as it is _Rʹ_ at the other end of the beam. The shear in the
portion _AD_ of the beam has the value _R_, but in passing the point
_D_ to the right the weight _W₁_ represented by _OT_ must be subtracted
from _R_, so that the shear over the section _b_ of the span is _R_ -
_W₁_ or _QV_ in the diagram. Similarly, in passing the point _H_ toward
the right, both _W₂_ and _W₁_ must be subtracted from _R_, giving the
negative shear (the previous shear being taken positive) _VW_. The
negative shear _VW_ remains constant throughout the distance _c_, but
is increased by _W₃_ at the point _L_, so that throughout the distance
_d_ the shear _Sʹ_ = _-Rʹ_. These shear values are all shown in the
lower portion of Fig. 13 by the vertical shaded lines. Obviously it is
a matter of indifference whether the shear above the straight line _GJ_
is made positive or negative; it is only necessary to recognize that
the signs are different.

In the case of heavy beams, either built or rolled, as in railroad
structures, it is of the greatest importance to determine both the
bending moments and the shears, as represented in the preceding
equations and diagrams, and to provide sufficient metal to resist them.

The case of Fig. 13 is perfectly general for moments and shears, and
the methods developed are applicable to any amount or any system of
loading whatever.

=83. Bending Moments and Shears with Uniform Loads.=—Fig. 14 represents
what is really a special case of Fig. 13, in which the loading is
uniform for each unit of length of the beam throughout the whole span
_l_. Inasmuch as the load is uniformly distributed, it is evident that
the reaction at each end of the beam will be one half the total load, or

               _wl_
    _R = R_ʹ = ----.      (17)
                 2

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

The general expression for the bending moment at any point _G_ in the
span, and located at the distance _x_ from the end _A_, will take the
form

                      _x     w_
    _M_ = _Rx_ - _wx_.--- = --- _x_(l-_x_).      (18)
                       2     2

This equation, giving the value of _M_, is the equation of a parabola
with the vertex over the middle of the span. The bending moment at the
latter point will be found by placing _x = l/2_ in equation (18), which
will give

          _wl²_
    _M_ = -----.      (19)
            8

Hence, in Fig. 14, if the vertical line _DC_ be erected at _D_, so as
to represent the value of _M_ in equation (19) to a convenient scale,
the parabola _ACB_ may be at once drawn. Any vertical intercept, as
_GF_ between _AB_ and the curve _AFCB_, will represent by the same
scale the bending moment in the beam at the point indicated by the
intercept. Equation (19), giving the greatest external bending moment
in a simple beam due to a uniform load, is constantly employed in
structural work, and shows that that moment is equal to the total load
multiplied by one eighth of the span.

It has already been shown, in connection with Fig. 12, that when a
single centre weight rests on a beam the centre bending moment is
equal to that weight multiplied by one fourth the span. If the total
uniform load in the one case is equal to the single load in the other,
these equations show that the single centre load will produce just
double the bending moment due to the same load uniformly distributed
over the span. Wherever it is feasible, therefore, the load should be
distributed rather than concentrated at the centre of the span.

That portion of Fig. 14 shaded with vertical lines shows the shear
existing in the beam. Evidently the shear at each end is equal to the
reaction, or one half the total load on the span. The expression for
the shear at any point, as _G_, distant _x_ from _A_ will be

                          ( _l_       )
    _S = R_ - _wx_ = _w_( ---- - _x_).      (20)
                          (  2        )

If _x = l/2_ in equation (20), _S_ becomes equal to zero. In other
words, there is no shear at the centre of the span of a beam uniformly
loaded. Hence, if at each end of the span a vertical line _AK_ or _BL_
be laid off downward, and if straight lines _KD_ and _DL_ be drawn,
any vertical intercept, as _GH_, between these lines and _AB_ will
represent the shear at the corresponding point. Equation (20) also
shows that the shear _S_ at any point is equal to the load resting on
the beam between the centre _D_ and that point. Although this case of
uniform loading is a special one it finds wide application in practical
operations.

=84. Greatest Shear for Uniform Moving Load.=—The preceding loads have
been treated as if they were occupying fixed positions on the beams
considered. This is not always the case. Many of the most important
problems in connection with the loading of beams and bridges arise
under the supposition that the load is movable, like that of a passing
railroad train. One of the simplest of these problems, although of much
importance, consists in finding the location of a uniform moving load,
like that of a train of cars, which will produce the greatest shear at
a given point of a simple beam, such as that represented in Fig. 15, in
which a moving load is supposed to pass continuously over the span from
the left-hand end _A_. It is required to determine what position of
this uniform load will produce the greatest shear at the section _C_.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

Let the moving load extend from _A_ to any point _D_ to the right of
_C_. The two reactions _R_ and _Rʹ_ may be found by the methods already
indicated. Let _W_ represent the uniform load resting on the portion
_CD_ of the span. The shear _S′_ existing at _C_ will be

    _Sʹ = Rʹ - W_.      (21)

Let _R‴_ be that part of _Rʹ_ which is due to _W_, and _Rʺ_ that part
due to the load on _AC_. Evidently _R‴_ is less than _W_; then

    _Sʹ = Rʺ + R‴ - W_.      (22)

Since the negative quantity _W_ is greater than the positive quantity
_R‴_, _S′_ will have its greatest value when both _W_ and _R‴_ are
zero. Hence the greatest shear at the point _C_ will exist when

    _Sʹ = Rʺ_.      (23)

Obviously the loading must extend at least from _A_ to _C_ in order
that _Rʺ_ may have its maximum value. Hence _the greatest shear at any
section will exist when the uniform load extends from the end of the
span to that section, whatever may be the density of the load_.

If the segment of the span covered by the moving load is greater than
one half the span, the maximum shear is called the _main shear_; but
if that segment is less than one half the span, the maximum shear is
called the _counter-shear_. The reason for these two names will be
apparent later in the discussion of bridge-trusses.

This rule for determining the maximum shear at any section of a beam is
equally applicable to bridge-trusses under certain conditions, and has
an important bearing upon the determination of the greatest stresses in
some of the members of bridge-frames, although it has less importance
now than it had in the earlier days of bridge-building.

=85. Bending Moments and Shears for Cantilever Beams.=—The case of a
loaded overhanging beam or cantilever bracket, as shown in Fig. 16, is
sometimes found. In that figure a single weight _W_ is supposed to be
applied at the end, while a uniform load _w_ per unit of length extends
over its length _l_. The bending moment at any point _C_ distant _x_
from the end will obviously be

               _wx²_
    _M = Wx_ + -----.      (24)
                 2

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

The greatest value of the bending moment will be found by placing _x_
equal to _l_ in equation (24), and it will have the value

                _wl²_
    _M₁ = Wl_ + -----.      (25)
                  2

The shear at any point and at the end _A_ respectively will be

    _S = W + wx_  and _S₁ = W + wl_.      (26)

The shear due to _W_ is equal to itself and is constant throughout the
whole length of the beam.

The second term of the second member of equation (24) is the equation
of a parabola with its vertex at _B_, Fig. 16. Hence if _AF_ be laid
off equal to (_wl_²)/2, and if the parabola _FHB_ be drawn, any
vertical intercept, as _HK_, between that curve and _AB_ will represent
the bending moment at the corresponding point. On the other hand, the
first term of the second member of equation (24) shows that the bending
moment due to _W_ varies directly as the distance from _B_. Hence if
_AG_ be laid off vertically downward from _A_ equal to _Wl_ to any
convenient scale, then any intercept, as _KL_, between _AB_ and _BG_
will represent the bending moment due to _W_ at the corresponding point
of the beam.

=86. Greatest Bending Moment with any System of Loading.=—One of the
most important positions of loading to be established either for
simple beams or for bridge-trusses is that at which any given system
of loading whatever is to be placed on any span so as to produce the
maximum bending moment at any prescribed point in that span. In order
to make the case perfectly general a system of arbitrary loads, like
that shown in Fig. 17, is assumed and the system is supposed to be a
moving one.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.]

The separate loads are placed at fixed distances apart, indicated by
the letters _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_, etc., _W_₁ being supposed to be at
the head of the train, while _W_₏ is the last load having a variable
distance _x_ between it and the end of the span. In Fig. 17 this system
of moving loads or train is supposed to pass over the span _l_ from
right to left. The problem is to determine the position of the loading,
so that the bending moment at the section _C_ of the beam or truss
will be a maximum, the section _C_ being at the distance _lʹ_ from the
left-hand end of the span. The complete analysis of this problem is
comparatively simple and may readily be found, but it is not necessary
for the accomplishment of the present purpose to give it here. In order
to exhibit the formula which expresses the desired condition, let _W_ₙʹ
be that weight which is really placed at _C_, but which is assumed to
be an indefinitely short distance to the left of that point, for a
reason which will presently be explained. The equation of condition or
criterion sought will then be the following:

    _lʹ      W₁ + W₂ + ... + Wₙʹ_
    ----- = ------------------------.      (27)
    _l      W₁ + W₂ + W₃ + ... + Wₙ_

If the loads are so placed as to fulfil the condition expressed in
equation (27), the bending moment at section _C_ will be a maximum. If
the variation in the train weights is very great, it is possible that
there may be more than one position of the train which will satisfy
that equation. It is necessary, therefore, frequently to try different
positions of the loading by that criterion and then ascertain which
of the resulting maximum moments is the greatest. It is not usually
necessary to make more than one or two such trials. The application of
the equation is therefore simple and involves but little labor.

It will usually happen that _W_ₙʹ in equation (27) is not to be taken
as the whole of that weight, but only so much of it as may be necessary
to satisfy the equation. This is simply assuming that any weight,
_W_, may be considered as made up of two separate weights placed
indefinitely near to each other, which is permissible.

After having found the position of loading which satisfies equation
(27), the resulting maximum bending moment will take the following form:

         _lʹ_
  _M₁_ = ----- [_W₁a_ + (_W₁+ W₂_)_b_ + ... + (_W₁ + W₂ + ... + Wₙ_)_x_]
         _l_

   - _W₁a_ - (_W₁ + W₂_)_b_ - ... - (_W₁ + W₂ + ... + W₍ₙʹ₋₁₎_)(?). (28)

In this equation _x_ corresponds to the position of loading for maximum
bending, while the sign (?) represents the distance between the
concentrations _W_₍ₙʹ₋₁₎ and _W_ₙʹ. This equation has a very formidable
appearance, but its composition is simple and it is constantly used in
making computations for the design of railroad bridges. The loads _W_₁,
_W_₂, _W_₃, etc., represent the actual weights on the driving-axles and
other axles of locomotives, tenders, and cars, and the spacings _a_,
_b_, _c_, etc., are the actual spacings found between those axles. In
other words, these quantities are the actual weights and dimensions of
the different portions of moving railroad trains.

The computations indicated by equation (28) are not made anew in every
instance. Concentrated weights of typical locomotives, tenders, and
cars are prescribed by different railroad companies for their different
classes of trains, ranging from the heaviest freight traffic to the
lightest passenger train. A tabulation is then made from equation
(28) for each such typical train, and it is used as frequently as is
necessary to design a bridge to carry the prescribed traffic. The
tabulations thus made are never changed for a given or prescribed
loading.

=87. Applications to Rolled Beams.=—It is to be remembered that these
last observations do not limit the use of equations (27) and (28) to
railroad-bridge trusses only; they are equally applicable to solid and
rolled beams and are frequently used in connection with their design.
Great quantities of these beams and various rolled steel shapes are
used in the construction of large modern city buildings, as well as in
railroad and highway bridge structures. The steel frames of the great
office buildings, so many of which are seen in New York and Chicago as
well as in other cities, which carry the entire weight of the building,
are formed wholly of these steel shapes. The so-called handbooks
published by steel-producing companies exhibit the various shapes
rolled in each mill. These books also give in tabular statements many
numerical values of the moment of inertia, the section modulus, and
other elements of all these sections, so that the formulæ which have
been established in the preceding pages may be applied in practical
work with great convenience and little labor. Tables are also given
showing the sizes of rolled beams required to sustain the loads named
in them. Such tables are formed for practical use, so that, knowing
the distance apart of the beams, their span, and the load per square
foot which they carry, the required size of beam may be selected
without even computation. Such labor-saving tables are quite common
at the present time, and they reduce greatly the labor of numerical
computations.




CHAPTER VIII.


=88. The Truss Element or Triangle of Bracing.=—A number of the
preceding formulæ find their applications to bridge-trusses, as well
as to beams; hence it is necessary to give attention at least to some
simple forms of those trusses.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.]

[Illustration: FIG. 18_a_.]

The skeleton of every bridge-truss properly designed to carry its load
is an assemblage of triangles. In other words, the truss element, i.e.,
the simplest possible truss, is the triangular frame, such as is shown
in skeleton in Figs. 18 and 18_a_. These simple triangular frames are
sometimes called the King-post Truss. The action of such a triangular
frame in carrying a vertical load is extremely simple. In Fig. 18 let
the weight _W_ be suspended from the apex _C_ of the triangle. The
line _CF_ represents that weight, and if the latter be resolved into
its two components parallel to the two upper members of the triangular
frame, the two component forces _CG_ and _CD_ will result. If from _D_
and _G_ the horizontal lines _DH_ and _GO_ be drawn, those two lines
will represent the horizontal components of the forces or stresses in
the two bars _CA_ and _CB_. The force _HD_ will act to the left at the
point _A_, and the force _CG_ will act to the right at _B_, and as
these two forces are equal and opposite to each other, equilibrium will
result. Either of the horizontal forces will represent the magnitude
of the tension in _AB_. Both _AC_ and _CB_ will be in compression,
the former being compressed by the force _CD_, and the latter by the
force _CG_. The manner of drawing a parallelogram of forces makes the
triangle _COG_ similar to _CNB_, and _CHD_ similar to _CNA_; hence
_HW_ divided by _CH_ will be equal to _AN_ divided by _NB_. But _HW_
is the vertical component of the stress in _CB_, while _CH_ is the
vertical component of the stress in _AC_, the latter being represented
by the reaction _R_ and the former by the reaction _R′_. It is seen,
therefore, that the weight _W_ is carried by the frame to the two
abutment supports _A_ and _B_, precisely as if it were a solid beam. In
other words, the important principle is established that when weights
rest upon a simple truss supported at each end they will produce
reactions at the ends in accordance with the principle of the lever,
precisely as in the case of a solid beam. In engineering parlance it
is stated that the weight _W_ is divided according to the principle of
the lever, and that each portion travels to its proper abutment through
the members of the triangular frame. If the two inclined members of the
triangular frame are equally inclined to a vertical, the case of Fig.
18_a_ results, in which one half of the weight goes to each abutment.

The triangular frame, with equally inclined sides, shown in Fig. 18_a_,
is evidently the simplest form of roof-truss, constituting two equally
inclined members with a horizontal tie.

=89. Simple Trusses.=—The simplest forms of trussing used for bridge
purposes are those shown in Figs. 19, 20, and 21. There are many other
forms which are exhibited in complete treatises on bridge structures,
but these three are as simple as any, and they have been far more used
than any other types. The horizontal members _af_ and _AB_ are called
the “chords,” the former being the upper chord and the latter the lower
chord. The vertical and inclined members connecting the two chords are
called the web members or braces. When a bridge is loaded, either by
its own weight only, or by its own weight added to that of a moving
train of cars, the upper chord will evidently be in compression, while
the lower chord is in tension. A portion, which may be called a half,
of the web members will be in tension and the other portion, or half,
will be in compression.

The function of the upper and lower chords is to take up or resist
the horizontal tension and compression which correspond to the direct
stresses of tension and compression existing in the longitudinal
fibres of a loaded solid or flanged beam. The metal designed to take
these so-called direct stresses is concentrated in the chords of
trusses, whereas it is distributed throughout the entire section of a
beam, whether that beam be solid or flanged. The function of the web
members of a truss is to resist the transverse or vertical shear which
is represented by the algebraic sum of the reactions and loads. The
total section of a solid beam resists these vertical shears, while
the web only of a flanged beam is estimated to perform that duty. The
horizontal shears, which have already been recognized as existing along
the horizontal planes in a bent beam, are resisted by the inclined
web members of a truss, the horizontal stress components being the
horizontal shears, whereas the vertical shears are resisted by the
vertical web members of a truss. If the web members are all inclined,
as shown in Fig. 21, each web member resists both horizontal and
vertical shear. It is thus seen that the members of a truss perform
precisely the same duties as the various portions of either solid or
flanged beams. Inasmuch as the chords of bridge-trusses resist the
direct or horizontal stresses of tension and compression produced
by the bending in the truss, it is obvious that the greatest chord
stresses will be found at the centre of the span, and that they will
be the smallest at the ends of the span. In the web members, on the
contrary, since the vertical shear is the greatest at the ends of the
span and equal to the reactions at those points, decreasing towards
the centre precisely as in solid beams, the greatest web stresses
will be found at the ends of the span and the least near the centre.
It is obvious that the areas of cross-sections of either chords or
web members must be proportioned to the stresses which they carry.
Hence the distribution of stresses just described tends to a uniform
distribution of the truss weights over the span.

=90. The Pratt Truss Type.=—In the discussion of these three simple
types of trusses, the simplest possible loading of a perfectly uniform
train will be assumed. The portions into which the trusses are divided
by the vertical or inclined bracing are called panels. In Fig. 19, for
instance, the points 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the lower chord and _a_,
_b_, _c_, _d_, _e_, and _f_ of the upper chord are called panel-points.
The distance between each consecutive two of these points is called a
panel length. The uniform train-load which is to be assumed will be
represented by the weight _W_ at each panel-point. This is called the
“moving load” or “live load.” The own weight of the structure is called
the “dead load” or the “fixed load.” The dead load per upper-chord
panel will be taken as _Wʹ_, and _W_₁ for the lower chord. The loads to
be used will, therefore, be as follows:

    Panel moving load           = _W_;
    Upper-chord panel dead load = _Wʹ_;
    Lower   ”     ”    ”    ”   = _W_₁.

There will also be used the length of panel and depth of truss as
follows:

    Panel length   = _p_;
    Depth of truss = _d_.


In these simple trusses with horizontal upper and lower chords the
stress in any inclined web members is equal to the shear multiplied by
the secant of the inclination of the members to a vertical line. Also,
at each panel-point every inclined web member, in passing from the end
to the centre of the span, adds to either chord stress at that point
an amount represented by the horizontal component of the stress which
it carries; or, what is the same thing, an amount equal to the shear
at the panel in question multiplied by the tangent of its angle of
inclination to a vertical line.

It has already been shown in discussing solid beams that the greatest
shear at any section will be found when the uniform moving load covers
one of the segments of the span. This principle holds equally true for
trusses carrying uniform panel-loads like those under consideration. In
determining the stresses in these trusses, therefore, the inclined web
members will take their greatest stresses when the moving train or load
extends from the farthest end of the span up to the foot of the member
in question. In this connection it is to be observed also that any two
web members meeting in the chord which does not carry the moving load
take their greatest stresses for the same position of the latter. The
so-called “counter web members” take no stresses from the dead load.

Inasmuch as every load placed upon a truss will produce compression in
the upper chord and tension in the lower, the greatest chord stresses
will obviously exist when the moving load covers the entire span,
and that condition of loading is to be used for the stresses in the
following cases.

Bearing these general observations in mind, the ordinary simple method
of truss analysis yields the tabulated statement of stresses given
below for the three types selected for consideration. The first case to
be treated is that of Fig. 19, which represents the Pratt truss type.
The moving load is supposed to pass across the bridge from right to
left. The plus sign indicates tension and the minus sign compression.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.]

    _Stress in c₁_ = + (¹/₇ + ²/₇) _W_ sec _a_ = ³/₇ _W_ sec _a_.
    _Stress in T₄_ = + (¹/₇ + ²/₇ + ³/₇) _W_ sec _a_ = ⁶/₇ _W_ sec _a_;
      ”    ”  _T₃_ = + [(¹/₇ + ²/₇ + ³/₇ + ⁴/₇) _W_ + _Wʹ_ + _W₁_] sec _a_
                 = (¹⁰/₇ _W_ + _Wʹ_ + _W₁_) sec _a_;
      ”    ”  _T₂_ = + [(¹/₇ + ²/₇ + ³/₇ + ⁴/₇ + ⁵/₇) _W_ + _2wʹ_ + _2w₁_] sec _a_
                 = (¹⁵/₇ W + 2wʹ + 2w₁) sec _a_;
      ”    ”  _T₁_ = + (_W_ + _W₁_).

    _Stress in P₃_ = -(⁶/₇ _W_ + _Wʹ_);
      ”    ”  _P₂_ = -(¹⁰/₇ _W_ + 2_Wʹ_ + _W₁_);
      ”    ”  _P₁_ = -3(_W_ + _Wʹ_ + _W₁_) sec _a_.

    _Stress in L₁_ =_Stress in L₂_ = + 3(_W_ + _Wʹ_ + _W₁_) tan _a_;
      ”    ”  _L₃_ =   ”    ”  _L₂_  + 2(_W_ + _Wʹ_ + _W₁_)tan _a_
                   +                 + 5(_W_ + _Wʹ_ + _W₁_) tan _a_;
      ”    ”  _L₄_ =   ”    ”  _L₃_  + (_W_  + _Wʹ_ + _W₁_) tan _a_
                                     + 6(_W_ + _Wʹ_ + _W₁_) tan _a_.

    _Stress in U₁_ = _-Stress in L₃_ = -5(_W_ + _Wʹ_ + _W₁_) tan α;
       ”   ”  _U₂_ = -   ”   ”  _L₄_ = -6(_W_ + _Wʹ_ + _W₁_) tan α;
       ”   ”  _U₃_ =     ”   ”  _U₂_ = -6(_W_ + _Wʹ_ + _W₁_) tan α.

It is easy to check any of the chord stresses by the method of moments.
As an example, let moments first be taken about the panel-point 5
in the lower chord, and then about the panel-point _c_ in the upper
chord. The following expressions for the chord members _U₁_ and _L₄_
will be found, and it will be noticed that they are identical with
the stresses for the same members given in the preceding tabulation,
the counter-members, shown in broken lines, being omitted from
consideration as they are not needed.

                     _R.2p_ - (_W + Wʹ + W₁_)_p_
    _Stress in U₁_ = ------------------------------
                                   _d_

                                     _p_
                  = 5(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) ---- = 5(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan α. (29)
                                     _d_

                     _R.3p_ - 2(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) . 1½_p_
    _Stress in L₄_ = ----------------------------------
                                  _d_

                    = 6(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan α.      (30)

[Illustration: FIG. 20.]

=91. The Howe Truss Type.=—The truss shown in Fig. 20 is the skeleton
of the Howe truss, to which reference has already been made. The
inclined web members are all in compression, while the vertical web
members are all in tension. In the Howe truss all compression members
are composed of timber. It has the disadvantage of subjecting the
longest web members to compression. It thus makes the truss, if built
all in iron or steel, heavier and more expensive than the trusses of
the Pratt type. As in the preceding case, the moving train or load is
supposed to pass across the bridge from _B_ to _A_. Also, as before,
the + sign indicates tension and the - sign compression. The greatest
stresses, given in the tabulated statement below, can be computed or
checked by the method of moments in this case, precisely as in the
preceding.

    _Stress in c₁_ = -(¹/₇ + ²/₇) _W_ sec _a_ = -³/₇ _W_ sec _a_.

    _Stress in P₄_ = -(¹/₇ + ²/₇ + ³/₇) _W_ sec _a_ = -⁶/₇ _W_ sec _a_;
        ”   ”  P₃_ = -(_¹⁰/₇ W + Wʹ + W₁_) sec _a_;
        ”   ”  P₂_ = -(_¹⁵/₇ W + 2Wʹ + 2W₁_) sec _a_;
        ”   ”  P₁_ = -3(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) sec _a_.

    _Stress in T₃_ = + (_¹⁰/₇ W + W₁_) sec _a_;
        ”  ”   T₂_ = + (_¹⁵/₇ W + Wʹ + 2W₁_) sec _a_;
        ”  ”   T₁_ = + (_3W + 2Wʹ + 3W₁_) sec _a_.

    _Stress in L₁_ = + 3(_W + Wʹ +W₁_) tan _a_;
       ”  ”    L₂_ = + 3(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a_+2(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a_
                    = + 5(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a_;
       ”  ”     L₃_ = + 5(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a_+(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a_
                    = + 6(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a_;
       ”  ”     L₄_ = _Stress in L₃._

    _Stress in U₁_ = _- Stress in L₁_
       ”  ”    U₂_ = _-    ”    ” L₂_;
       ”  ”    U₃_ = _-    ”    ” L₃_.

It will be noticed in the cases of Figs. 19 and 20 that upper and lower
chord panels in the same lozenge or oblique panel have identically
the same stresses, but with opposite signs. For instance, in Fig. 20
the stress in _U₂_ is equal in amount to that in _L₂_; and the same
observation can be made in reference to the stresses in _U₂_ and _L₄_
of Fig. 19. This must necessarily always be the case in trusses having
vertical web members.

In making computations for these forms of trusses it is very essential
to observe where the first counter-member, as _c₁_, must be used. These
counter-members may be omitted if the proper main web members near the
centre of the span are designed to take both tension and compression.

=92. The Simple Triangular Truss.=—The truss shown in Fig. 21, in which
all the web members have equal inclination to a vertical line, is
sometimes called the Warren Truss, although that term has also been
applied specially to this type of truss so proportioned as to make the
depth just equal to the panel length. As before, the moving train is
supposed to pass over the bridge from _B_ toward _A_, while the + sign
represents tension and the - sign compression. The greatest stresses
are the following.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.]

                          { -(_⁶/₇W + ½Wʹ_) sec _a_, or
    _Stress in P₄_ = { +(_⁶/₇W - ½W′_) sec _a_;
      ”      ” P₃_ = { -(_¹⁰/₇W + 1½W′ + W₁_) sec _a_, or
                          { +(_³/₇ W - 1½Wʹ - W₁_) sec _a_;

      ”      ” P₂_ = -(_¹⁵/₇ W + 2½Wʹ + 2W₁_) sec _a_;
      ”      ” P₁_ = -(_3W + 3½ Wʹ + 3W₁_) sec _a_.

                          { +(_¹⁰/₇W + ½Wʹ + W₁_) sec _a_, or
    _Stress in T₃_ = { -(_³/₇W - ½Wʹ - W₁_) sec _a_;

      ”      ” T₂_ = +(_¹⁵/₇W + 1½W′ + 2W₁_) sec _a_;
      ”      ” T₁_ = +(_3W + 2½Wʹ + 3W₁_) sec _a_.

    _Stress in L₁_ = + 3(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a + ½W′_ tan _a_;
      ”      ” L₂_ = _Stress in L₁_ + (_5W + 5Wʹ + 5W₁_) tan _a_
                           = + 8(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a + ½Wʹ_ tan _a_;
      ”      ” L₃_ = _Stress in L₂_ + 3(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a_
                           = + 11 (_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a + ½Wʹ_ tan _a_;
      ”      ” L₄_ = _Stress in L₃_ + (_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a_
                           = + 12 (_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a + ½Wʹ_ tan _a_.

    _Stress in U₁_ = -6(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a_;
       ”     ” U₂_ = -6(_W + Wʹ + W₁_)tan _a_ - 4(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a_
                          = -10(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a_;

       ”     ” U₃_ = -10(_W+ Wʹ+ W₁_) tan _a_ - 2(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a_
                           = -12(_W + Wʹ + W₁_) tan _a_.

The chord stresses may be checked or found by the method of moments,
precisely as in the case of Fig. 19. If, for instance, it is desired
to determine the stresses in the upper chord member _U₂_, moments must
be taken about the lower-chord panel-point 5, and about the upper-chord
panel-point _d_ for the lower-chord stress in _L₄_. Taking moments
about those points, results given in equations (31) and (32) will at
once follow, which it will be observed are identical with the values
previously found for the same members.

                      (_3W + 3½ W′ + 3W₁_)._2p_ - 2_W′p_ - (_W + W₁_)_p_
    _Stress in U₂_ = - -------------------------------------------------
                                           _d_

                           = -10(_W + W′ + W₁_) tan _a_.      (31)

                      (_3W + 3½ W′ + 3W₁_)._3½ p_ - 3(_W + W₁_)._1½p - 3W′.2p_
    _Stress in L₄_ = + -------------------------------------------------------
                                               _d_

                   = + 12(_W + W₁ + W′_) tan _a_ + ½_W′_ tan _a_. (32)

=93. Through- and Deck-Bridges.=—These simple trusses have all been
taken as belonging to the “through” type, i.e., the moving load passes
along their lower chords. It is quite common to have the moving load
pass along the upper chords, in which cases the bridges are said to be
“deck” structures. The general methods of computation are precisely
the same whether the trusses be deck or through. It is only necessary
carefully to observe that the application of the methods of analysis
depends upon the position of each panel-load as it passes across the
structure.

[Illustration: Fig. 22.]

=94. Multiple Systems of Triangulation.=—Figs. 19, 20, and 21 exhibit
what are called single systems of triangulation or single systems
of bracing, but in each of those types the system of web members
may be double or triple; in other words, they may be manifold.
There have been many bridges built in which two or more systems
of bracing are employed. Fig. 22 represents a truss with a double
system of triangulation, known at one time as the Whipple truss.
Fig. 23, again, exhibits a quadruple system of triangulation with all
inclined web members. The method of computation for such manifold
systems is precisely the same as for a single system, each system in
the compound truss being treated as carrying those loads only which
rest at its panel-points. This procedure is not quite accurate. The
complete consideration of an exact method of computation would take
the treatment into a region of rather complicated analysis beyond the
purposes of these lectures, but its outlines will be set forth on a
later page. The exact method of treatment of two or more web systems
involves the elastic properties of the material of which the trusses
are composed. In the best modern bridge practice engineers prefer to
design trusses of all lengths with single web systems, although the
panels are frequently subdivided to avoid stringers and floor-beams of
too great weight.

[Illustration: Fig. 23.]

=95. Influence of Mill and Shop Capacity on Length of Span.=—In
the early years of iron and steel bridge-building the sizes of
individual members were limited by the shop capacity for handling
and manufacturing, and by the relatively small dimensions of bars of
various shapes, and of plates which could be produced by rolling-mills.
As both mill and shop processes have advanced and their capacities
increased, corresponding progress has been made in bridge design. Civil
engineers have availed themselves of those advances, so that at the
present time single system trusses with depths as great as 85 feet or
more and spans of over 550 feet are not considered specially remarkable.

=96. Trusses with Broken or Inclined Chords.=—As the lengths of spans
have increased certain substantial advantages have been gained in
design by no longer making the upper chords horizontal in the case of
long through-spans, or indeed in the cases of through-spans of moderate
length. The greatest bending moments and the greatest chord stresses
have been shown to exist at the centre of the span, while the greatest
web stresses are found near the ends. Trusses may be lightened in view
of those considerations by making their depths less at the ends than at
the centre. This not only decreases the sectional areas of the heaviest
web members near the ends of the truss, but also shortens them. It
adds somewhat to the sectional area of the end upper-chord members,
but the resultant effect is a decrease in total weight of material and
increased stability against wind pressure by the decreased height and
less exposure near the ends. It has therefore come to be the ruling
practice at the present time to make through-trusses with inclined
upper chords for practically all spans from about 200 feet upward. A
skeleton diagram of such a truss is given in Fig. 24.

[Illustration: Fig. 24.]

=97. Position of any Moving Load for Greatest Web Stress.=—In the
preceding treatment of bridge-trusses with parallel and horizontal
chords a moving or live load has been taken as a series of uniform
weights concentrated at the panel-points. This simple procedure
was formerly generally used, and at the present time it is
occasionally employed, but it is now almost universal practice to
assume for railroad bridges a moving load consisting of a series of
concentrations, which represent both in amount and distribution the
weights on the axles of an actual railroad train. If a bridge is
supposed to be traversed by such a train, it becomes necessary to
determine a method for ascertaining the positions of the train causing
the greatest stresses in the various members of the bridge-truss. The
mathematical demonstration of the formulæ determining those positions
of loading need not be given here, but it can be found in almost any
standard work on bridges.

In order to show concisely the results of such a demonstration let it
be desired to find the position of a moving load which will give the
greatest stress to any web member, as _S_ in Fig. 24. Let the point of
intersection of _GK_ and _DC_ be found in the point _O_, then let _CK_
be extended, and on its extension let the perpendicular _h_ be dropped
from _O_. The distance of the point _O_ from _A_, the end of the span,
is _i_, while _m_ is the distance _AD_. Using the same notation which
has been employed in the discussion of beams, together with that shown
in Fig. 24, equation (33) expresses the condition to be fulfilled by
the train-loads in order that _S_ shall have its greatest stress. The
first parenthesis in the second member of that equation represents the
load between the panel _p_ and the left end of the span, while the
second parenthesis represents the load in panel _p_ itself.

                             _l_
    _W₁ + W₂ + ... + Wₙ_ = - ----(_W₁ + W₂_ + etc.)
                             _i_

                               _l_(_m + i_)
          + (_W₃ + W₄_ + etc.) ---------------        (33)
                                 _pi_.

It will be noticed in equation (33) that the quantity _m_ shows in
what panel the inclined web member whose greatest stress is desired
is located, and it is important to observe that panel carefully. If,
for instance, the vertical member _KD_ were in question, the point _O_
would be located at the intersection of the panel _NK_ and the lower
chord of the bridge. In other words, the point _O_ must be at the
intersection of the two chord members belonging to the same panel in
which the web member is located.

=98. Application of Criterions for both Chord and Web Stresses.=—The
criterion, equation (33), belongs to web members only. If it is desired
to find the position of moving load which will give the greatest chord
stresses in any panel, equation (27), already established for beams,
is to be used precisely as it stands, the quantity _l′_ representing
the distance from one end of the span to the panel-point about which
moments are taken.

If the desired positions of the moving load for greatest stresses have
been found by equations (27) and (33), those stresses themselves are
readily found by taking moments about panel-points for chord members
and about the intersection-points _O_, Fig. 24, for web members.
These operations are simple in character and are performed with
great facility. Tabulations and diagrams are made for given systems
of loading by which these computations are much shortened and which
enable the numerical work of any special case to be performed quickly
and with little liability to error. These tabulations and diagrams and
other shortening processes may be found set forth in detail in many
publications and works on bridge structures. They constitute a part of
the office outfit of civil engineers engaged in structural work.

The criterion, equation (27), for the greatest bending moments in a
bridge is applicable to any truss whatever, whether the chords are
parallel or inclined, but it is not so with equation (33). If the
chords of the trusses are parallel, the quantity _i_ in equation (33)
becomes infinitely great, and the equation takes the following form:

                           _l_
    _W₁ + W₂ + ... + Wₙ_ = ---- (_W₃ + W₄_ + etc.)      (34)
                           _p_

Ordinarily the span _l_ divided by the panel length _p_ is equal to the
number of panels in the span. Hence equation (34) shows, in the case
of parallel or horizontal chords, that when the moving load is placed
for the greatest web stress in any panel, the total load on the bridge
is equal to the load in that panel multiplied by the total number of
panels.

=99. Influence Lines.=—A graphical method, known as that of “influence
lines,” is used for determining the greatest shears and bending moments
caused by a train of concentrated weights passing along a beam or
bridge-truss. Obviously it must express in essence that which has
already been shown by the formulæ which determine positions of moving
loads for the greatest shears and bending moments. In reality it is the
application of graphical methods which have become so popular to the
determination of the greatest stresses in beams and bridges.

=100. Influence Lines for Moments both for Beams and Trusses.=—It is
convenient to construct these influence lines for an arbitrary load
which may be considered a unit load; the effect of any other load will
then be in proportion to its magnitude. The results determined from
influence lines drawn for a load which may be considered a unit can,
therefore, be made available for other loads by multiplying the former
by the ratio between any desired load and that for which the influence
lines are found.

[Illustration: FIG. 25.—Bending Moment in a Simple Beam.]

_AB_ in Fig. 25 represents a beam simply supported at each end, so
that any load _g_ resting upon it will be divided between the points
of support, according to the law of the lever. Let it be desired to
determine the bending moment at the section _X_ produced by the load
_g_ in all of its positions as it passes across the span from _A_ to
_B_. Two expressions for the bending moment must be written, one for
the load _g_ at any point in _AX_, and the other for the load at any
point in _BX_. The expression for the first bending moment is

                  _z_
          _M = g_ ----(_l-x_),    (_a_)
                  _l_

    and that for the latter

                  _l-z_
          _M′ = g_ ---- _x_.       (_b_)
                   _l_

As shown in the figure, _z_ and _x_, the latter locating the section at
which the bending moments are to be found, are measured to the right
from _A_. Equation (_a_) shows that if the quantity _g_(l-_x_) be laid
off, by any convenient scale, as _BK_ at right angles to _AB_, _XC_
will represent the moment _M_ by the same scale when _x = z_ or when
_z_ has any value between 0 and _x_. Similarly will _AD_ be laid off
at right angles to _AB_ by the same scale as before, to represent _gx_.
Then when _x = z_ the expression for _M′_ will have the same value _XC_
as before. Hence if the lines _AC_ and _CB_ be drawn as parts of _AK_
and _DB_, any vertical intercept between _AB_ and _ACB_ will represent
the bending at _X_ produced by the load _g_ when placed at the point
from which the intercept is drawn. The lines _AC_ and _CB_ are the
influence lines for the bending moments produced by the load _g_ in its
passage across the span _AB_. It is to be observed that the influence
lines are continuous only when the positions of the moving load are
consecutive. In case those positions are not consecutive the influence
lines are polygonal in form.

If there are a number of loads _g_ resting on the span at the same
time, the total bending moments produced at _X_ will be found by taking
the sum of all the vertical intercepts between _AB_ and _ACB_, drawn at
the various points where those loads rest. The influence lines drawn
for a single load, therefore, may be at once used for any number of
loads.

The load _g_ is considered as a unit load. If the vertical intercepts
representing the bending moments by the scale used are themselves
represented by _y_, and if _W_ represent any load whatever, the general
expression for the bending moment at _X_, produced by any system of
loads, will be

    _l_
    ---- ∑_Wy._      (_c_)
    _g_

If this expression be written as a series, the general value of the
bending moment will be the following:

          _l_
    _M_ = --- (_W₁y₁ + W₂y₂ + W₃y₃_ + etc.).   (_d_)
          _g_

The effect of a moving train upon the bending moment at any given
section is thus easily made apparent by means of influence lines. It is
obvious that there will be as many influence lines to be drawn as there
are sections to be considered. In the case of a truss-bridge there will
be such a section at every panel-point.

A slight modification of the preceding results is to be made when the
loads are applied to the beam or truss at panel-points only.

In Fig. 25 let 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 be panel-points at which loads
are applied, and let the load _g_ be located at the distance _z′_ to
the right of panel-point 5, also let the panel length be _p_. The
reactions at 5 and 6 will then be

              _p-z′_                _z′_
    _R₅ = g_ -------- and _R₆ = g_ ------.
               _p_                  _p_

The reactions at _A_ will then be

            _l-z_
    _R = g_ ------.
             _l_

Hence the moment at any section _X_ in the panel in question will be

                                   [ _l-x                   z′_]
    _M = Rx-R₅_{_z_′-(_z-x_)} = _g_[ ---- _z_-(_z-z′ + p-x_)---]. (_e_)
                                   [ _l                     p_ ]

Remembering that _z-z′_ is a constant quantity, it is at once clear
that the preceding expression is the equation of a straight line,
with _M_ and _z_ or _z′_ the variables. If _z′ = 0_, equation (_e_)
becomes identical with equation (_a_), while if _z′ = p_, it becomes
identical with equation (_b_). Hence the influence line for the panel
in which the load is placed, as 5-6, is the straight line _KL_. It is
manifest that when the load _g_ is in any other panel than that in
which the section _X_ is located, the effect of the two reactions at
the extremities of that panel will be precisely the same at the section
as the weight itself acting along its own line of action. Hence the
two portions _AK_ and _BL_ of the influence line are to be constructed
as if the load were applied directly to the beam or truss, and in the
manner already shown. The complete influence line will then be _AKLB_,
and it shows that the existence of the panel slightly reduces the
bending at any section within its limits. The panel 5-6, as treated,
is that of a beam in which the bending moment will, in general, vary
from point to point. If _AB_ were a truss, however, _X_ would always be
taken at a panel-point, and no intercept between panel-points, as 5 and
6, would be considered.

=101. Influence Lines for Shears both for Beams and Trusses.=—The
influence lines for shears in a simple beam, supported at each end,
can be drawn in the manner shown in Fig. 25_a_. In that figure _AB_
represents a non-continuous beam with span _l_ supported from _A_. The
reaction at _A_ will be

         _l-z_
    _R_ = ----- _g_.
          _l_

[Illustration: FIG. 25_a_.—Shear in a Simple Beam.]

Let _X_ be the section at which the shear for various positions of _g_
is to be found. When _g_ is placed at any point between _A_ and _X_ the
shear _S_ at the latter point will be

                           _z_
    _S_ = _R_ = _g_ = -_g_ ----;      (_f_)
                            _l_

but when the load is placed between _B_ and _X_ the shear becomes

                        _z_
    _S_′ = _R_ = _g-g_ ----.      (_h_)
                        _l_

Obviously these two values of the shear are equations of two parallel
straight lines, that represented by equation (_f_) passing through
_A_, and that represented by equation (_h_) passing through _B_, the
constant vertical distance between them being _g_. Hence let _BF_ be
laid off negatively downward and _AG_ positively upward, each being
equal to _g_ by any convenient scale. The ordinates drawn from the
various positions 1, 2, 3 ... 6 of _g_ on _AB_ to _AD_ and _BC_ will
be the shears at _X_ produced by the load _g_ at any point of the
span, and determined by equations (_f_) and (_h_). The influence line,
therefore, for the section _X_ will be the broken line _ADCB_. When
_g_ is at _X_ the sign of the shear changes, since the latter passes
through a zero value.

If a train of weights _W₁_, _W₂_, _W₃_, etc., passes across the span,
the total shear at _X_ will be found by taking the sum of the vertical
intercepts between _AB_ and _ADCB_, drawn at the positions occupied by
the various single weights of the train. If those single weights are
expressed in terms of the unit load _g_, the shear _S_ will have the
value

            1
    _S_ = ---- ∑ _Wy_;
          _g_

_y_ being the general value of the intercept between _AB_ and the
influence line. The latter shows that the greatest negative shear at
_X_ will exist when the greatest possible amount of loading is placed
on _AX_ only, while the greatest positive shear at the same section
will exist when _BX_ only is loaded. If _BX_ is the smaller segment of
span, the latter shear is called the “counter-shear,” and the former
the “main shear.”

If the loads are applied at panel-points of the span only, the
treatment is the same in general character as that employed for bending
moments. In Fig. 25_a_ let 4 and 5 be the panel-points between which
the load _g_ is found, and let the panel length be _p_. Also, let _z′_
be the distance of the weight _g_ from panel-point 4. The reactions at
_A_ and 4 will then be

          _l - z               p - z′_
    _R_ = ------_g_ and _R₄_ = ----------- _g_.
            _l                   p_

The shear at the section _X_ for any position of the weight _g_ will
then be

                        (_z′    z_)
    _S_ = _R - R₄_ = _g_(--- - ---).      (_k_)
                        (_p     l_)

As this is the equation of a straight line, with _S_ and _z_ or _z′_
for the coordinates, the influence line for the panel in which the
section _X_ is located will be the straight line represented by _KL_ in
Fig. 25_a_.

If _z′_ is placed equal to 0 and _p_ successively, then will equation
(_k_) become identical with equations (_f_) and (_h_) in succession.
The shears at points 4 and 5 will therefore take the same values as if
the loads were applied directly to the beam. For the reasons stated in
connection with the consideration of bending moments, loads in other
panels than that containing the section for which the influence line
is drawn will have the same effect on that section as if they were
applied directly to the beam or truss. Hence _AKLB_ is the complete
influence line for this case.

It is evident that there must be as many influence lines drawn as there
are sections to be discussed. Also, if _g_ is taken as some convenient
unit, i.e., 1000 or 10,000 pounds, it is clear that the labors of
computation will be much reduced.

=102. Application of Influence-line Method to Trusses.=—In considering
both the bending moments and shears when the loads are applied at
panel-points, it has been assumed, as would be the case in an ordinary
beam, that the bending moments as well as the shears may vary in the
panel; but this latter condition does not hold in a bridge-truss.
Neither bending moment nor shear varies in any one panel. Yet the
influence lines for moments and shears are to be drawn precisely as
shown in Figs. 25 and 25_a_. The section _X_ will always be found at
a panel-point, and no intercept drawn within the limits of the panel
adjacent to that section carrying the load _g_ is to be used. This
method will be illustrated by the aid of Fig. 25_b_.

The employment of influence lines may be illustrated by determining
the moment and shear in a single section of the truss shown in Fig.
24, which is reproduced in Fig. 25_c_, when carrying the moving load
exhibited in Fig. 25_b_, although its use may be much extended beyond
this simple procedure.

The moving load shown in Fig. 25_b_ is that of a railroad train
consisting of a uniform train-load of 4000 pounds per linear foot
drawn by two locomotives with the wheel concentrations shown; it is
a train-load frequently used in the design of the heaviest class of
railroad structures. If the criterion of equation (27) be applied to
this moving load, passing along the truss shown in Fig. 25_c_, from
left to right, it will be found that the greatest bending moment is
produced at the section _Q_ when the second driving-axle of the second
locomotive is placed at the truss section in question, as shown in Fig.
25_c_.

The unit load to be used in connection with the influence lines will be
taken at 10,000 pounds. Remembering that the panel lengths are each 30
feet, it will be seen that the panel-point _Q_ is 150 feet from _A_.
Hence the product _gx_ will be 1,500,000 foot-pounds. Similarly the
product _g_(l - _x_) will be 900,000 foot-pounds. Laying off the first
of these quantities, as _AD_, at a scale of 1,000,000 foot-pounds per
linear inch, and the second quantity, as _BK_, by the same scale, the
influence line _ACB_ can at once be completed. Vertical lines are next
to be drawn through the positions of the various weights, including
one through the centre of the uniform train-load 110 feet in length
resting on the truss. The vertical line through the centre of the
uniform train-load is shown at _O_. By carefully scaling the vertical
intercepts between _AB_ and _ACB_, and remembering that each of the
loads on the truss must be divided by 10,000, the following tabulated
statement will be obtained, the sum of the intercepts for each set
of equal weights being added into one item, and all the items of
intercepts being multiplied by 1,000,000:

     .195 × 110  × .4 × 1,000,000 = 8,580,000 foot-pounds.
    1.78  × 2.6       ×     ”     = 4,628,000  ”      ”
    2.14  ×  4        ×     ”     = 8,560,000  ”      ”
     .485 ×  2        ×     ”     =   970,000  ”      ”
    1.525 ×  2.6      ×     ”     = 3,965,000  ”      ”
     .9   × 4         ×     ”     = 3,600,000  ”      ”
     .12  ×  2        ×     ”     =   240,000  ”      ”
                                   ----------
                                  2⟌30,543,000  ”      ”
                                   ----------
            Moment for one truss = 15,271,500  ”      ”

The lever-arm of _ef_, i.e., the normal distance from _Q_ to _ef_, is
39.7 feet. Hence the stress in _ef_ is

    15,271,500
    ----------- = 384,700 pounds.
       39.7

All the chord stresses can obviously be found in the same manner.

In order to place the same moving load so as to produce the greatest
shear at the same section _Q_, the criterion of equation (33) must be
employed. The dimensions of the truss shown in connection with Fig. 29
give the following data to be used in that equation: _i_ = 210 feet,
_m_ = 60 feet, and _p_ = 30 feet.


          _l_(_m + i_)          _l_
    Hence ------------ = 10²/₇, --- = 1¹/₇.
               _pi               i_

[Illustration: FIG. 25_b_.]

[Illustration: FIG. 25_c_.]

[Illustration: FIG. 25_d_.]

Introducing these quantities into equation (33), and remembering
that the train moves on to the bridge from _A_, it would be found
that the second axle of the first locomotive must be placed at the
section _Q_, as shown in Fig. 25_d_, which exhibits the lower-chord
panel-points numbered from 1 to 7. The conventional unit load _g_
will be taken in this case at 20,000 pounds. It is represented as
_AG_ and _BF_ (Fig. 25_d_), laid off at a scale of 10,000 pounds per
inch. _K_ is immediately under panel-point 5 and _L_ is immediately
above panel-point 6, hence the broken line _AKLB_ is the influence
line desired. The vertical lines are then drawn from each train
concentration in its proper position, all as shown, including the
vertical line through the centre of the 54 feet of uniform train-load
on the left. The summation of all the vertical intercepts between _AB_
and the influence line _AKL_, having regard to the scale and to the
ratio between the various loads and the unit load _g_, will give the
following tabular statement:

     .22 × 54 × .2 × 10,000 = 23,760 pounds.
    2.2  ×     1.3 ×   ”    = 28,600    ”
    3.02 ×     2   ×   ”    = 60,400    ”
     .9  ×     1   ×   ”    =  9,000    ”
    4.06 ×     1.3 ×   ”    = 53,780    ”
    4.53 ×     2   ×   ”    = 90,060    ”
     .5  ×     1   ×   ”    =  5,000    ”
                            --------
                          2⟌ 270,600    ”
                            --------
       Shear for one truss = 135,300    ”

These simple operations illustrate the main principles of the method of
influence lines from which numerous and useful extensions may be made.




CHAPTER IX.


=103. Lateral Wind Pressure on Trusses.=—The duties of a bridge
structure are not confined entirely to the supporting of vertical
loads. There are some horizontal or lateral loads of considerable
magnitude which must be resisted; these are the wind loads resulting
from wind pressure against both structure and moving train. In order
to determine the magnitudes of these loads it is assumed in the first
place that the direction of the wind is practically or exactly at
right angles to the planes of the trusses and the sides of the cars.
This assumption is essentially correct. There is probably nothing
else so variable as both the direction and pressure of the wind.
These variations are not so apparent in the exposure of our bodies
to the wind, for the reason that we cannot readily appreciate even
considerable changes either in direction or pressure. As a matter of
fact suitable measuring apparatus shows that there is nothing steady
or continued in connection with the wind unless it be its incessant
variability. Its direction may be either horizontal or inclined, or
even vertical, while within a few seconds its pressure may vary between
wide limits. Under such circumstances the wind is as likely to blow
directly against both bridge and train as in any other direction, and
inasmuch as such a condition would subject the structure to its most
severe duty against lateral forces, it is only safe and proper that
the assumption should be made. The open work of bridge-trusses enables
the wind to exert practically its full pressure against both trusses
of a single-track bridge, or against even three trusses if they are
used for a double-track structure. Hence it is customary to take the
exposed surface of bridge-trusses as the total projected area on a
plane throughout the bridge axis of both trusses if there are two, or
of three trusses if there are three. Inasmuch as the floor of a bridge
from its lowest point to the top of the rails or other highest point
of the floor is practically closed against the passage of the wind,
all that surface between the lowest point and the top of the rail or
highest floor-member is considered area on which wind pressure may act.

Many experimental observations show that on large surfaces, greater
perhaps than 400 or 500 square feet in area, the pressure of the wind
seldom exceeds 20 or 25 pounds per square foot, while it may reach 80
or 90 pounds, or possibly more on small surfaces of from 2 to 40 or 50
square feet in area. This distinction between small and large exposed
areas in the treatment of wind pressures is fundamental and should
never be neglected.

This whole subject of wind pressures has not yet been brought into
a completely definite or well-defined condition through lack of
sufficient experimental observations, but in order to be at least
reasonably safe civil engineers frequently, and perhaps usually,
assume a wind pressure acting simultaneously on both bridge and train
at 30 pounds per square foot of exposed surface and 50 pounds per
square foot of the total exposed surface of a bridge structure which
carries no moving load. This distinction arises chiefly from the fact
that a wind pressure of 30 pounds per square foot on the side of many
railroad trains, particularly light ones, will overturn them, and it
would be useless to use a larger pressure for a loaded structure. There
have been wind pressures in this country so great as to blow unloaded
bridges off their piers; indeed in one case a locomotive was overturned
which must have resisted a wind pressure on its exposed surface of not
less than 90 pounds and possibly more than 100 pounds per square foot.

The consideration of wind pressure is of the greatest importance in
connection with the high trusses of long spans, as well as in long
suspension and cantilever bridges, and in the design of high viaducts,
all of which structures receive lateral wind pressures of great
magnitude.

Some engineers, instead of deducing the lateral wind loads from the
area of the projected truss surfaces, specify a certain amount for
each linear foot of span, as in ”The General Specifications for Steel
Railroad Bridges and Viaducts” by Mr. Theodore Cooper it is prescribed
that a lateral force of 150 pounds for each foot of span shall be taken
along the upper chords of through-bridges and the lower chords of
deck-bridges for all spans up to 300 feet in length; and that for the
same spans a lateral force of 450 pounds for each foot of span shall
be taken for the lower chords of through-spans and the upper chords of
deck-spans, 300 pounds of this to be treated as a moving load and as
acting on a train of cars at a line 8⁵/₁₀ feet above the base of rail.

When the span exceeds 300 feet in length each of the above amounts
of load per linear foot is to be increased by 10 pounds for each
additional 30 feet of span.

Special wind-loadings and conditions under which they are to be used
are also prescribed for viaducts.

These wind loads are resisted in the bridges on which they act by a
truss formed between each two upper chords for the upper portion of the
bridge, and between each two lower chords for the lower portion of the
structure.

[Illustration: FIG. 26.]

=104. Upper and Lower Lateral Bracing.=—Fig. 26 shows what are called
the upper and lower lateral bracing for such trusses as are shown in
the preceding figures. The wind is supposed to act in the direction
shown by the arrow. _DERA_ and _KLBC_ are the two portals at the ends
of the structure, braced so as to resist the lateral wind pressures.
It will be observed that the systems of bracing between the chords
make an ordinary truss, but in a horizontal plane, except in the
case of inclined chords like that of Fig. 24. In the latter case the
lateral trusses are obviously not in horizontal planes, but they may
be considered in computations precisely as if they were. These lateral
trusses are then treated with their horizontal panel wind loads just
as the vertical trusses are treated for their corresponding vertical
loads, and the resulting stresses are employed in designing web and
chord members precisely as in vertical trusses. The wind stresses in
the chords, in some cases, are to be added to those due to vertical
loading, and in some cases subtracted. In other words, the resultant
stresses are recognized and the chord members are so designed as
properly to resist them. At the present time it is the tendency
in the best structural work to make all the web members of these
lateral trusses of such section that they can resist both tension
and compression, as this contributes to the general stiffness of the
structure. On account of the great variability of the wind pressures
and the liability of the blows of greatest intensity to vary suddenly,
some engineers regard all the wind load on structure or train as a
moving load and make their computations accordingly. It is an excellent
practice and is probably at least as close an approximation to actual
wind effects as the assumption of a uniform wind pressure on a
structure.

Both the lateral and transverse wind bracing of railroad bridges have
other essential duties to perform than the resistance of lateral wind
pressures. Rapidly moving railroad trains produce a swaying effect on
a bridge, in consequence of unavoidable unevenness of tracks, lack of
balance of locomotive driving-wheels, and other similar influences.
These must be resisted wholly by the lateral and transverse bracing,
and these results constitute an important part of the duties of that
bracing. These peculiar demands, in connection with the lateral
stability of bridges, make it the more desirable that the lateral and
transverse bracing should be as stiff as practicable.

=105. Bridge Plans and Shopwork.=—After the computations for a bridge
design are completed in a civil engineer’s office they are placed in
the drawing-room, where the most detailed and exact plans of every
piece which enters the bridge are made. The numerical computations
connected with this part of bridge construction are of a laborious
nature and must be made with absolute accuracy, otherwise it would be
quite impossible to put the bridge together in the field. The various
quantities of bars, plates, angles, and other shapes required are then
ordered from the rolling-mill by means of these plans or drawings. On
receipt of the material at the shop the shopwork of manufacture is
begun, and it involves a great variety of operations. The bridge-shop
is filled with tools and engines of the heaviest description. Punches,
lathes, planers, riveters, forges, boring and other machines of the
largest dimensions are all brought to bear in the manufacture of the
completed bridge.

=106. Erection of Bridges.=—When the shop operations are completed
the bridge members are shipped to the site where the bridge is to be
erected or put in place for final use. A timber staging, frequently
of the heaviest timbers for large spans, called false works, is first
erected in a temporary but very substantial manner. The top of this
false work, or timber staging, is of such height that it will receive
the steelwork of the bridge at exactly the right elevation. The bridge
members are then brought onto the staging and each put in place and
joined with pins and rivets. If the shopwork has not been done with
mathematical accuracy, the bridge will not go together. On the accuracy
of the shopwork, therefore, depends the possibility of properly fitting
and joining the structure in its final position. The operations of the
shop are so nicely disposed and so accurately performed that it is not
an exaggeration to state that the serious misfit of a bridge member
in American engineering practice at the present time is practically
impossible. This leads to rapid erection so that the steelwork of a
pin-connected railroad bridge 500 feet long can be put in place on the
timber staging, or false works, and made safe in less than four days,
although such a feat would have been considered impossible twenty years
ago.

[Illustration: FIG. 27.]

=107. Statically Determinate Trusses.=—The bridge structures which
have been treated require but the simplest analysis, based only on
statical equations of equilibrium of forces acting in one plane, i.e.,
the plane of the truss. It is known from the science of mechanics that
the number of those equations is at most but three for any system of
forces or loads, viz., two equations of forces and one of moments. This
may be simply illustrated by the system of forces _F₁_, _F₂_, etc., in
Fig. 27. Let each force be resolved into its vertical and horizontal
components _V_ and _H_. Also let _l₁_, _l₂_, etc. (not shown in the
figure), be the normals or lever-arms dropped from any point _A_ on the
lines of action of the forces _F₁_, _F₂_, etc., so that the moments of
the forces about that point will be _F₁l₁_, _F₂l₂_, etc. The conditions
of purely statical equilibrium are expressed by the three general
equations

    _H₁ + H₂_ + etc. = _F₁_ cos _a₁_ + _F₂_ cos _a₂_ + etc. = 0;    (35)
    _V₁ + V₂_ + etc. = _F₁_ sin _a₁_ + _F₂_ sin _a₂_ + etc. = 0;    (36)
    _Fl = F₁l₁ + F₂l₂_ + etc. = 0.                                  (37)

If all the forces except three are known, obviously those three can
be found by the three preceding equations; but if more than three are
unknown, those three equations are not sufficient to find them. Other
equations must be available or the unknown forces cannot be found. In
modern methods of stress determinations those other needed equations
express known elastic relations or values, such as deflections or the
work performed in stressing the different members of structures under
loads. A few fundamental equations of these methods will be given.

In Figs. 19, 20, and 21 let the truss be cut or divided by the
imaginary sections _QS_. Each section cuts but three members, and as
the loads and reactions are known, the stresses in the cut members
will yield but three unknown forces, which may be found by the three
equations of equilibrium (35), (36), (37). If more than three members
are cut, however, as in the section _TV_ of Figs. 22 and 23, making
more than three unknown equations to be found, other equations than
the three of statical equilibrium must be available. Hence the general
principle that _if it is possible to cut not more than three members
by a section through the truss, it is statically determinate_, but _if
it is not possible to cut less than four or more, the stresses are
statically indeterminate_.

At each joint in the truss the stresses in the members meeting there
constitute, with the external forces or loads acting at the same point,
a system in equilibrium represented by the two equations (35) and (36).
If there are _m_ such joints in the entire structure, there will be
2_m_ such equations by which the same number of unknown quantities
may be found. Since equilibrium exists at every joint in the truss,
the entire truss will be in equilibrium, and that is equivalent to
the equilibrium of all the external forces acting on it. This latter
condition is expressed by the three equations (35), (36), and (37),
and they are essentially included in the number 2_m_. Hence there
will remain but 2_m_ - 3 equations available for the determination of
unknown stresses or external forces.

If, therefore, all the external forces (loads and reactions) are
known, the 2_m_ - 3 equations of static equilibrium can be applied
to the determination of stresses in the bars of the truss or other
structure. It follows, therefore, that the greatest number of bars that
a statically determinate truss can have is

    _n_ = 2_m_ - 3.      (38)

In Fig. 19 there are twelve joints and twenty-one members, omitting
counter web members and the verticals _ab_ and _fl_, which are,
statically speaking, either superfluous or not really bars of the
truss. Hence

    _m_ = 12 and 2_m_ - 3 = 21.      (39)

Again, in Fig. 21 there are fifteen joints. Hence

    _m_ = 15, 2_m_ - 3 = 27,

and there are twenty-seven bars or members of the truss. The number of
joints and bars in actual, statically determinate trusses, therefore,
confirm the results.

=108. Continuous Beams and Trusses—Theorem of Three Moments.=—These
considerations find direct application to what are known as ”continuous
beams,” i.e., beams (or trusses) which reach continuously over two or
more spans, as shown in Fig. 28.

[Illustration: FIG. 28.]

The beam shown is continuous over three spans, but a beam or truss may
be continuous over any number of spans. In general the ends of the beam
or girder may be fixed or held at the ends _A_ and _D_, so that bending
moments _M_ and _M₃_ at the same points may have value. The bending
moments at the other points of support are represented by _M₁_, _M₂_,
etc. The points of support may or may not be at the same elevation, but
they are usually assumed to be so in engineering practice. Finally,
it is ordinarily assumed that the continuous structure is straight
before being loaded, and that in that condition it simply touches the
points of support. Whether the preceding assumptions are made or not,
a perfectly general equation can be written expressing the relation
between the bending moments over each set of three consecutive points
of support, as _M_, _M₁_, and _M₂_, or _M₁_, M₂, and M₃. Such an
equation expresses what is called the ”Theorem of Three Moments.” It is
not necessary to give the most general form of this theorem, as that
which is ordinarily used embodies the simplifying assumptions already
described. This simplified form of the ”Theorem of Three Moments”
applied to the case of Fig. 28 will yield the following two equations:

                                       1  ₁
    _Ml₁ + 2M₁_(_l₁ + l₂_) + _M₂l₂_ + ---- ∑  _W_(_l₁² - z²_)_z_
                                      _l₁_

               1    ₂
            + ----- ∑ _W_(_l₂² - z²__)z_ = 0.      (40)
              _l₂_

                                        1    ₂
    _M₁l₂ + 2M₂_(_l₂ + l₃_) + _M₃l₃_ + ------ ∑ _W_(_l₂² - z²_)
                                       _l₂_
               1   ₃
            + ---- ∑ _W_(_l₃² - z²_)_z_ = 0.      (41)
              _l₃_

The figure over the sign of summation shows the span to which the
summation belongs. If there is but one weight or load _W_ in each span,
the sign of summation is to be omitted. In an ordinary bridge structure
or beam the ends are simply supported and _M = M₃ = 0_. In any case if
the number of supports be _n_, there will be _n_ - 2 equations like the
preceding.

If the end moments _M_ and _M₃_ are not zero, they will be determinable
by the local conditions in each instance. In any event, therefore, they
will be known, and there will be but _n_ - 2 unknown moments to be
found by the same number of equations. When the moments are known the
reactions follow from simple formulæ.

=109. Application to Draw- or Swing-bridges.=—In general the
reactions or supporting forces of the beams and trusses of ordinary
civil-engineering practice are vertical, and all their points
of application are known. Hence there are but two equations of
equilibrium, equations (36) and (37), for external forces. These two
equations for the external forces and the _n_ - 2 equations derived
from the theorem of three moments are therefore always sufficient to
determine the _n_ reactions. After the reactions are known all the
stresses in the bars or members of the trusses can at once be found.
The preceding equations and methods as described are constantly
employed in the design and construction of swing- or drawbridges.

=110. Special Method for Deflection of Trusses.=—The method of finding
the elastic deflections produced by the bending of solid beams has
already been shown, but it is frequently necessary to determine the
elastic deflections of bridge-trusses or other jointed or so-called
articulate frames or structures. It is not practicable to use the
same formulæ for the latter class of structures as for the former.
The elastic deflection of a bridge- or roof-truss depends upon the
stretching or compressions of its various members in consequence of the
tensile or compressive forces to which they are subjected. Any method
by which the deflection is found, therefore, must involve these elastic
changes of length. There are a number of methods which give the desired
expressions, but probably the simplest as well as the most elegant
procedure is that which reaches the desired expression through the
consideration of the work performed in the truss members in producing
their elastic lengthenings and shortenings.

The general features of this method can readily be shown by reference
to Fig. 29. It may be supposed that it is desired to find the
deflection of any point, as _J_, of the lower chord produced both by
the dead and live load which it carries. It is known from what has
preceded that every member of the upper chord will be shortened and
that every member of the lower chord will be lengthened; and also that
generally the vertical web members will be shortened and the inclined
web members lengthened. If there can be obtained an expression giving
that part of the deflection of _J_ which is due to the change of
length of any one member of the truss independently of the others,
then that expression may be applied to every other member in the
entire truss, and by taking the sum of all those effects the desired
deflection will at once result. While this expression will be found for
some one particular truss member, it will be of such a general form
that it may be used for any truss member whatever; it will be written
for the upper-chord member _BC_ in Fig. 29.

[Illustration: FIG. 29.]

The general problem is to determine the deflection of the point _J_
when the bridge carries both dead and moving load over the entire span,
as shown in Fig. 29. The general plan of procedure is first to find
the stresses due to this combined load in every member of the truss,
so that the corresponding lengthening or shortening is at once shown.
The effect of this lengthening and shortening for any single member
_BC_ in producing deflection at _J_ is then determined; the sum of all
such effects for every member of the truss is next taken, and that sum
is the deflection sought. In this case the vertical deflection will be
found, because that is the deflection generally desired in connection
with bridge structures, but precisely the same method and essentially
the same formulæ are used to find the deflection in any direction
whatever. The following notation will be employed:

    Let _w_ = deflection in inches at any panel-point or joint
                   of the truss;

      ” _P_ = any arbitrary load or weight supposed to be hung at
                     the point where the deflection is desired and
                     acting as if gradually applied. This may be taken
                     as unity;

      ” _Z_ = stress produced in any member of truss by _P_;

      ” _S_ = stress produced in any member of truss by the combined
                   dead and moving loads;

    Let _l_ = length in inches of any member of the truss in which
              _Z_ or _S_ is found;

       ” _A_ = area of cross-section of same member in square inches;

       ” _E_ = coefficient of elasticity.

_S_ or _Z_ may be either tension or compression, and the formulæ will
be so expressed that tension will be made positive and compression
negative.

The change of length of the chord member _BC_ produced by a stress
gradually increasing from zero to _S_ is

    _S_
    ----_l_.
    _AE_

If it be supposed that _BC_ is a spring of such stiffness that it will
be compressed by the gradual application of _Z_ exactly as much as
the shortening of the actual member by the stress _S_, the deflection
of the point 4 with the weight _P_ hung from it, and due to that
compression alone, will be precisely the same as that due to the actual
shortening of _BC_ by the combined dead and moving loads.

It is known by one of the elementary principles of mechanics that,
since _P_ acts along the direction of the vertical deflection _w_, the
work performed by the weight _P_ over that deflection is equal to the
work performed by _Z_ over the change of length _l_. Hence

    _l          l      Sl_
    --- _Pw_ = --- _Z_ ----, or
     2          2      _AE_

              _Z   Sl_
         _w_ = --- ----.        (42)
              _P   AE_

The quantity _Z÷P_ is the stress produced in the member by a unit load
applied at the joint or point where the deflection is desired. Again,
_S÷A_ is the stress per unit of area, i.e., intensity of stress, in the
member considered by the actual dead and moving loads. For brevity let
these be written

        _Z            S_
        --- = _z_ and --- = _s_;
        _P            A_

then

              _zsl_
        _w_ = ------.      (43)
               _E_

If the influence of every member of the truss is similarly expressed,
the value of the total deflection produced by the dead and moving loads
will be

            _zsl_
    _w_ = ∑ ------.       (44)
             _E_

The sign of summation ∑ indicates that the summation is to extend over
all the web and chord members of the truss.

=111. Application of Method for Deflection to Triangular Frame.=—Before
applying those equations to the case of Fig. 29 it is best to consider
a simpler case, i.e., that of the triangular frame shown in Fig. 18.
The reactions are

          _l₂                 l₁_
    _R_ = --- _W_ and _Rʹ_ = --- _W_.      (45)
          _l                  l_

The stresses in the various members are:

                   _l₁_
    In _CB_, _S_ = ---- _W_ sec α.
                    _l_

                  _l₂_
    ” _CA_, _S_ = ---- _W_ sec β.
                   _l_

                  _l₂             l₁_
    ” _AB_, _S_ = --- _W_ tan β = --- _W_ tan α.
                  _l               l_

    Also: _CB = h_ sec α; area of section = _A₁_.
          _CA = h_ sec β;   ”   ”    ”    = _A₂_.
          _AB = l_;         ”   ”    ”    = _A₃_.

In this instance it is simplest to take _P = W_. Equation (44) then
gives

          ( _l₁²  h_ sec³ α    _l₂²  h_ sec³ _β_
    _w_ = (----- ---------- + ----- -------------
          ( _l²       A₁        l²        A₂_

               _l₂²  l_ tan² _β_ ) _W_
             + ----  ------------) ------.         (46)
                _l²        A₃_   ) _E_

Let it be supposed that

        _l_ = 25 feet = 300 inches;
        _h_ = 8 feet 4 inches = 100 inches;
        _l₂_ = 16 feet 8 inches = 200 inches and _l₁_ = 100 inches;
    tan β = 1; sec β = 1.414;
    sec α = 2.24;
        _W_ = 10,000 pounds.

If the bars are all supposed to be of yellow-pine timber, there may be
taken

    _E_ = 1,000,000 pounds;
    _A₁_ = 10″ × 12″ = 120 square inches;
    _A₂_ = 10″ × 10″ = 100 square inches;
    _A₃_ = 10″ × 12″ = 120 square inches.

The insertion of these quantities in equation (46) gives the deflection

    _w_ = .01042 + .01253 + .01111 = 0.034.      (47)

Equation (47) is so written as to show the portion of the deflection
due to each member of the frame.

In applying either equation (43) or equation (44) care must be taken
to give each stress and its corresponding strain (lengthening or
shortening) the proper sign. As the formulæ have been written and
used, a tensile stress and its resulting stretch must each be written
positive, while a compressive stress must be written negative. This
holds true for both the stresses _Z_ and _S_ (or _z_ and _s_). The
magnitude of the assumed load _P_ is a matter of indifference, since
the stress _Z_ will always be proportional to it and the ratio _P ÷ Z_
will therefore be constant. _P_ is frequently taken as unity; or, as in
the case just given, it may have any value that the conditions of the
problem make most convenient.

=112. Application of Method for Deflection to Truss.=—In making
application of the deflection formulæ to any steel railroad truss
similar to that shown in Fig. 29, it will first be necessary to
determine the stresses in all its members due to the dead and moving
loads, since the deflection under the moving load is sought. These
loads will be considered uniform, and that is sufficiently accurate for
any railroad bridge. The moving train-load will be taken as covering
the entire span, assumed, for a single-track railroad, 240 feet in
length between centres of end pins. There are eight panels of 30
feet each, and the depth of truss at centre is 40 feet. Other truss
dimensions are as shown in Fig. 29. The dead loads, or own weight, are
taken at 400 pounds per linear foot of span for the rails and other
pieces that constitute the track; at 400 pounds per linear foot for
the steel floor-beams and stringers, and 1600 pounds per linear foot
for the weight of trusses and bracing. The moving train-load will be
taken at 4000 pounds per linear foot. This will make the panel-loads
for each truss as follows:

    Lower-chord dead load,   30 ×  800 = 24,000 pounds per panel.
    Lower-chord moving load, 30 × 2000 = 60,000   ”     ”    ”
                                         ------
        Total load on lower chord      = 84,000   ”     ”    ”
    Upper-chord dead load,    30 × 400 = 12,000   ”     ”    ”

The structure is a “through” bridge, hence all moving loads rest on the
lower chord.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.]

The stresses in the truss members due to the combined uniform dead and
moving load are best found by the graphical method. One diagram only is
needed to determine all the stresses, and it is shown in Fig. 30. This
diagram is drawn accurately to scale, and the stresses measured from it
are shown in the table on page 136.

The stresses in all the truss members due to the unit load hung at
_J_ are readily found by the single diagram shown in Fig. 31, also
carefully drawn to scale. These stresses measured from the diagram
are given in the table as indicated by the column _z_; they are also
represented in equation (44) by the letter _z_. The quantity _s_ in
equation (44) is the intensity of the stress (pounds per square inch of
cross-section of member) produced by the combined dead and moving loads
in each member. As shown, these stresses are least in the web members
near the centre of the span, and greatest in the chord members. The
lengths in inches of the truss members are shown in the proper column
of the table. It will be observed that all counter web members are
omitted, as they are not needed for the uniform load. The coefficient
of elasticity (_E_) is taken at 28,000,000 pounds. The quantities
represented by the second member of equation (44) are computed from
these data, and they appear in the last column of the table, the sum
of which gives the desired deflection in inches. The elements of the
table show how much of the deflection is due to the chords and to the
web members, and they show that disregarding the latter would lead to a
considerable error.

    +-------+----------+---------+--------+-----+---------+
    |       |    _S_     |    _s_    |    _z_   |  _l_  |    _w_    |
    +-------+----------+---------+--------+-----+---------+
    | _L₁_ | +373,300 | +12,000 |  +.555 | 360 | +.08563 |
    | _L₂_ | +373,300 | +12,000 |  +.555 | 360 | +.08563 |
    | _L₃_ | +480,000 | +12,000 |  +.833 | 360 | +.1284  |
    | _L₄_ | +540,000 | +12,000 | +1.125 | 360 | +.1736  |
    | _P₁_ | -502,300 |  -9,000 |  -.748 | 472 | +.1132  |
    | _U₁_ | -501,000 |  -9,500 |  -.870 | 376 | +.1108  |
    | _U₂_ | -544,800 | -10,000 | -1.135 | 363 | +.1472  |
    | _U₃_ | -576,000 | -10,000 | -1.50  | 360 | +.1928  |
    | _T₁_ |  +84,000 |  +9,000 |    0   | 324 |   --    |
    | _T₂_ | +143,500 | +10,000 |  +.3738| 472 | +.0629  |
    | _P₂_ |  -12,000 |  -1,000 |  -.250 | 432 | +.00386 |
    | _T₃_ |  +93,720 |  +7,400 |  +.456 | 562 | +.0677  |
    | _P₃_ |  +12,000 |  +1,000 |  -.35  | 480 | -.0060  |
    | _T₄_ |  +60,000 |  +4,800 |  +.625 | 600 | +.0643  |
    | _P₄_ |  -12,000 |  -1,000 |    0   | 480 |   --    |
    +-------+----------+---------+--------+-----+---------+

          Deflection for ½ truss members = 1.2300 inches.
          Deflection at _J_ = 2 × 1.2300 = 2.4600 inches.

[Illustration: FIG. 31.]

As the deflection is usually desired in inches, the lengths of members
must be taken in the same unit.

=113. Method of Least Work.=—The so-called theorem or principle of
“Least Work” is closely related to the subject of elastic deflections
just considered in its availability for furnishing equations of
condition in addition to those of a purely statical character in cases
where indetermination would result without them. This principle of
least work is expressed in the simple statement that when any structure
supports external loading the work performed in producing elastic
deformation of all the members will be the least possible. Although
this principle may not be susceptible of a complete and general
demonstration, it may be shown to hold true in many cases if not all.
The hypothesis is most reasonable and furnishes elegant solutions in
many useful problems.

The application of this principle requires the determination of
expressions for the work performed in the elastic lengthening and
shortening of pieces subjected either to tension or compression, and
for the work performed in the elastic bending of beams carrying loads
at right angles to their axes. Both of these expressions can be very
simply found.

Let it be supposed that a piece of material whose length is _L_ and the
area of whose cross-section is _A_ is either stretched or compressed by
the weight or load _S_ applied so as to increase gradually from zero to
its full value. The elastic change of length will be _SL/AE_, _E_ being
the coefficient of elasticity. The average force acting will be ½_S_,
hence the work performed in producing the strain will be

     1  _S²L_
    --- -----.      (48)
     2  _AE_

It will generally be best, although not necessary, to take _L_ in
inches. The expression (48) applies either to tension or compression
precisely as it stands.

To obtain the expression for the work performed by the stresses in a
beam bent by loads acting at right angles to its axis, a differential
length (_dL_) of the beam is considered at any normal section in
which the bending moment is _M_, the total length being _L_. Let _I_
be the moment of inertia of the normal section, _A_, about an axis
passing through the centre of gravity of the latter, and let _k_ be the
intensity of stress (usually the stress per square inch) at any point
distant _d_ from the axis about which _I_ is taken. The elastic change
produced in the indefinitely short length _dL_ when the intensity _k_
exists is (_k/E_)_dL_. If _dA_ is an indefinitely small portion of
the normal section, the average force or stress, either of tension or
compression, acting through the small elastic change of length just
given, can be written by the aid of equation (5) as

                   _Md_
         ½_k.dA_ = ----- ._dA._              (49)
                    2_I_

Hence the work performed in any normal section of the member, for which
_M_ remains unchanged, will be, since ∫_k.dA.d_ = _M_,

           ⌠ _M                   M²_
           ⌡ ------ _kd.dA.dL_ = ----- _dL._ (50)
             2_IE_               2_IE_

    The work performed throughout the entire piece will then be

        ⌠  _M²_
        ⌡ ------ _dL._                       (51)
          2_IE_

Each of the expressions (48) and (51) belongs to a single piece or
member of the structure. The total work performed in all the pieces
subjected either to direct stress or to bending, and which, according
to the principle of least work, must be a minimum, is found by taking
the summation of the two preceding expressions:

           1  ⎲ _S²L_       1   ⎲ ⌠  _M²_
    _e_ = ----⎳ ------ +  ----- ⎳ ⌡ ----- _dL_ = minimum.   (52)
          2_E_      _A_     2_E_        _I_

In making an application of equation (52) it is to be remembered that
_S_ is the direct stress of tension or compression in any member, and
that _M_ is the general value of the bending moment in any bent member
expressed in terms of the length _L_.

=114. Application of Method of Least Work to General Problem.=—The
problem which generally presents itself in the use of equation (52)
is the finding of an equation which expresses the condition that the
work expended in producing elastic deformation shall be a minimum, some
particular stress in the structure or some external load or force being
the variable. If _t_ represent that variable, then the desired equation
of condition will be found simply by placing the first differential
coefficient of _e_ in equation (52) equal to zero:

    _de_      1  (⎲ _S  dS_         ⎲ ⌠ _M   dM_     )
    ----- =  ----(⎳ --- ---  _dL_ + ⎳ ⌡ ---- --- _dL_) = 0.     (53)
    _dt_      _E_(    _A  dt_               _I   dt_    )

The solution of equation (53) will give a value of _t_ which will make
the work performed as expressed in equation (52) a minimum. This method
is not a difficult one to employ in such cases as those of drawbridges
and stiffened suspension bridges. In the latter case particularly it is
of great practical value.

=115. Application of Method of Least Work to Trussed Beam.=—The method
of least work may be illustrated by the application of the preceding
equations to the simple truss shown in Fig. 32. The pieces _BC_ and
_GD_ are supposed to be of yellow-pine timber, the former 10 inches by
14 inches (vertical) in section and the latter 8 inches by 10 inches,
while each of the pieces _BD_ and _DC_ are two 1⅝-inch round steel
bars. The coefficient of elasticity _E_ will be taken at 1,000,000
pounds for the timber and 28,000,000 for the steel. The length of _BC_
is 360 inches; _GD_ 96 inches; _BD_ = 96 × 2.13 = 204.5 inches.

    tan α = 1.875 and sec α = 2.13.

The weight _W_ resting at _G_ is 20,000 pounds. A part of this weight
is carried by _BC_ as a simple timber beam, while the remainder of the
load will be carried on the triangular frame _BCD_ acting as a truss,
the elastic deflection of the latter throwing a part of the load on
_BC_ acting as a beam. According to the principle of least work the
division of the load will be such as to make the work performed in
straining the different members of the system a minimum.

That part of _W_ which rests on _BC_ as a simple beam may be
represented by _W₁_, while _W₂_ represents the remaining portion
carried by the triangular frame. As _G_ is at the centre of the span,
the beam reaction at either _B_ or _C_ is ½_W₁_. Hence the general
value of the bending moment in either half of the beam at any distance
_x_ from either _B_ or _C_ is

    _M_ = ½_W₁x._ Hence _M²dL_ = ¼_W₁²x²dx_.

As there is but one member acting as a beam, whose moment of inertia
_I_ is constant, the second term of the second member of equation (52)
becomes, by the aid of the preceding equation,

      1               1   ¹/₂               1    _W₁²l³_
    ----- ⌠ _M²dL_ = ---- ⌠   _¼W₁²x²dx_ = ---- --------.      (54)
    2_EI_ ⌡          _EI_ ⌡₀               _EI_   96

[Illustration: FIG. 32.]

The numerical elements of the expression for the work done in the
members of the triangular frame are:

    Member.       Stress.           Length.        Area of Section.

      _BC_     ½_W₂_ tan _α_   360 inches = _l_    140 square inches
      _DC_     ½_W₂_ sec _α_   204.5 ”             4.14  ”    ”
      _DG_     _W₂_                  96  ”             80     ”    ”

                10 × 14³    27440
          _I_ = -------- = ------- = 2286.7.
                   12        12

The substitution of those quantities in the first term of the second
member of equation (52) will give


      1  ⎲ _S²L_      1       ( _W₂²_ tan² _α_.360   _W₂²_.96 )
    -----⎳ ----- = ---------- (------------------ + ----------)
    2_E      A_      2,000,000  (       4 × 140           80    )

             2       _W₂²_ sec² _α_ .204.5
       + ----------- --------------------- = .000,003,73 _W₂²_.
         56,000,000        4 × 4.14

The substitution of numerical quantities in equation (54) gives

      1   _W₁²l³_
    ---- -------- = .000,213_W₁²_.
    _EI_    96

Or, since _W - W₂ = W₁_,

    _e_ = .000,003,73_W₂²_ + .000,213(_W - W₂)²_.      (55)

Hence

    _de_
    ---- = .000,007,46_W₂_ - .000,426(_W - W₂_) = 0.      (56)
    _dW₂_

The solution of this equation gives

    _W₂_ = .893_W_ = 19,660 pounds.

              _W₁_ =    340   ”

It is interesting to observe that the first term of the second member
of equation (56) is the deflection of the point of application of _W₂_
as a point in the frame, while the second term is the deflection of
the point of application of _W₁_ considered as a point of the beam.
In other words, the condition resulting from the application of the
principle of least work is equivalent to making the elastic deflections
by _W₁_ and _W₂_ equal. Indeed equation (53) expresses the equivalence
of deflections whenever the features of the problem are such as to
involve concurrent deflections of two different parts of the structure.

=116. Removal of Indetermination by Methods of Least Work and
Deflection.=—The indetermination existing in connection with the
computations for such trusses as those shown in Fig. 22 and Fig.
23 can be removed by finding equations of condition by the aid of
the method of least work or of deflections. It is evident that the
component systems of bracing of which such trusses are composed must
all deflect equally. Hence expressions may be found for the deflections
of those component trusses, each under its own load. Since these
deflections must be equal, equations of condition at once result. A
sufficient number of such equations, taken with those required by
statical equilibrium, can be found to solve completely the problem.
Such methods, however, are laborious, and the ordinary assumption of
each system carrying wholly the loads resting at its panel-points is
sufficiently near for all ordinary purposes.

The method of least work can be very conveniently used for the solution
of a great number of simple problems, like that which requires the
determination of the four reactions under the four legs of a table,
carrying a single weight or a number of weights, and many others of the
same character.




CHAPTER X.


=117. The Arched Rib, of both Steel and Masonry.=—During the past ten
or fifteen years the type of bridge structure called the arched rib has
come into much use, and its merits insure for it a wider application in
the future. It partakes somewhat of the nature of both truss and arch;
or it may be considered a curved beam or girder. The ordinary beam
or truss when placed in a horizontal position and loaded vertically
yields only vertical reactions. Under the same conditions, however, the
arched rib will produce both vertical and horizontal reactions, and the
latter must either be resisted by abutments of sufficient mass, or by a
tie-rod, usually horizontal, connecting the springing points of the rib.

The arched rib may be built solid, as was done in the early days of
bridge-building in this country when engineers like Palmer, Burr, and
Wernwag introduced timber arches in combination with their wooden
trusses, or as a curved plate girder, one of the most prominent
examples of which is the Washington Bridge across the Harlem River
in the city of New York; or, again, as a braced frame or curved
truss, like the 800 feet arched rib carrying the roadway traffic and
trolley cars across the Niagara gorge, or like those used in such
great railroad train-sheds as the Grand Central Station, New York,
the Pennsylvania stations at Jersey City and Philadelphia, and the
Philadelphia and Reading station in Philadelphia. Those are all
admirable examples of steel arched ribs, and they are built to sustain
not only vertical loads but, in the case of station roofs, the normal
or horizontal wind pressures.

Within a few years, less than ten, another type of arched rib has
been brought into use and promises to be one of the most beautiful as
well as the most substantial applications of this type of structure;
that is, the arched rib of combined steel and concrete. Many examples
of this type of structure already exist both in this country and in
Europe, probably the most prominent of which in this country is that at
Topeka, Kansas, across the Kansas River.

[Illustration: =FIG. 33.=]

[Illustration: =FIG. 34.=]

[Illustration: =FIG. 35.=]

The characteristic feature of this type of structure, so far as the
stresses developed in it are concerned, is the thrust throughout its
length, more or less nearly parallel to its axis, which is combined
with the bending moments and shears similar to those found in
ordinary bridge-trusses. This thrust is the arch characteristic and
differentiates it in a measure from the ordinary bridge-truss, while
the bending moments and shears to which it is subjected differentiate
it, on the other hand, from the pure arch type or a series of blocks
in which thrust only exists. The thrust, bending moments, and shears
in arched ribs are all affected by certain principal features of
design. Those features are either fixedness of the ends of the ribs
or the presence of pin-joints at those ends or at the crown. Fig. 33
represents an arched rib with its ends _D_ and _F_ supposed to be
rigidly fixed in masonry or by other effective means.

=118. Arched Rib with Ends Fixed.=—The railroad steel arched bridge at
St. Louis, built by Captain Eads between 1868 and 1874, is a structure
of this character. The three spans (two each 537 feet 3 inches and one
552 feet 6 inches in length from centre to centre of piers) consist of
ribs the main members of which are composed of chrome steel. It was a
structure of unprecedented span when it was built, and constituted one
of the boldest pieces of engineering in its day. The chords of the ribs
are tubes made of steel staves, and their ends are rigidly anchored
to the masonry piers on which they rest. It is exceedingly difficult,
indeed impossible, to fix rigidly the ends of such a structure,
and observations in this particular instance have shown that the
extremities of the ribs are not truly fixed, for the piers themselves
yield a little, giving elastic motion under some conditions of loading.

=119. Arched Rib with Ends Jointed.=—The rib shown in Fig. 34 is
different from the preceding in that pin-joints are supplied at each
end, so that the rib may experience elastic distortion or strain by
small rotations about the pins at _A_ and _B_. In the computations for
such a design it is assumed that the ends of the rib may freely change
their inclination at those points. As a matter of fact the friction
is so great, even if no corrosion exists, as to prevent motion, but
the presence of the pins makes no bending moment possible at the end
joints, and the failure to move freely probably produces no serious
effect upon the stresses in the ribs. The presence of these pin-joints
simplifies the computations of stresses and renders them better
defined, so that there is less doubt as to the actual condition of
stress under a given load than in the type shown in Fig. 33 with ends
fixed more or less stiffly. In Fig. 34, if the horizontal force _H_
exerted by the ends of the rib against the points of support is known,
the remaining stresses in the structure can readily be computed; but
neither in Fig. 34 nor in Fig. 33 are statical equations sufficient for
the determination of stresses. Equations of condition, depending upon
the elastic properties of the material, are required before solutions
of the problems arising can be made.

=120. Arched Rib with Crown and Ends Jointed.=—The rib shown in Fig.
35 possesses one characteristic radically different from any found in
the ribs of Figs. 33 and 34, in that it is three-jointed, one pin-joint
being at the crown and one at each end. So far as the conditions of
stress are concerned, this is the simplest rib of all. Since there is a
pin-joint at the crown as well as at the ends, the bending moments must
be zero at each of those three points whatever may be the condition of
loading. The point of application of the force or thrust at the crown,
therefore, is always known, as well as the points of application at the
ends of the joints. As will presently be seen, this condition makes
equations of statical equilibrium sufficient for the determination of
all stresses in the rib, and no equations depending upon the elastic
properties of the material are required. The stresses in this class of
ribs, therefore, are more easily determined than in the other two, and
they are better defined. These qualities have insured for it a somewhat
more popular position than either of the other two classes. The ribs
of the great train-sheds of the Pennsylvania and Reading railroads in
Jersey City and in Philadelphia belong to this class, while those of
the Grand Central Station at New York City belong to the class shown
in Fig. 34, as does the arched rib across the Niagara gorge, to which
reference has already been made.

=121. Relative Stiffness of Arch Ribs.=—Obviously the three-hinged
ribs are less stiff than the two-hinged ribs or those with fixed
ends. This is a matter of less consequence for station roofs than for
structures carrying railroad loads. The joints of the two-hinged rib
being at the ends of the structure, there is but little difference in
stiffness between that class of ribs and those with ends fixed. Indeed
the difference is so slight, and the uncertainty as to the degree of
fixedness of the fixed ends of the rib is so great, that the latter
type of rib possesses no real advantage over that with hinged ends.

=122. General Conditions of Analysis of Arched Ribs.=—In each of the
three types of arched ribs shown in Figs. 33, 34, and 35 it is supposed
that all external forces act in the vertical planes which contain the
centre lines of the various members of the rib. There are, therefore,
the three conditions of statical equilibrium expressed by the three
equations (35), (36), and (37). In practically all cases, except those
of arched ribs employed in roof construction, all the external loads
are vertical. In such cases the equations of statical equilibrium of
the entire structure may be reduced to two only, viz., equations (36)
and (37). These features of the problems connected with the design
of arched ribs will always make necessary, except in the case of the
three-hinged rib (Fig. 35), equations of condition depending upon the
elastic properties of the structure.

The rib represented by Fig. 33 is supposed to have its ends so fixed
that the inclinations of the centre line at _F_ and _D_ will never
change whatever may be the loading or the variation of temperature.
This requires the application at each of those points of a couple whose
moment varies in value, but which is always equal and opposite to the
bending moment at the same point produced by the loads imposed on the
rib. It is also to be observed that the loads resting upon the rib are
not divided between the points of support _F_ and _D_ in accordance
with the law of the lever, since the conditions of fixedness at the
ends are equivalent to continuity. There are then to be found, as
acting external to the rib, the two vertical reactions and the two
moments at _F_ and _D_, as well as the horizontal thrust exerted at
the ends of the structure, which is sometimes resisted by the tie-rod,
making five unknown quantities. Inasmuch as all external loading is
supposed to be vertical, equations (36) and (37) are the only statical
equations available, and three others, depending upon the elastic
properties of the structure, must be supplied in order to obtain the
total of five equations of condition to determine the five unknown
quantities. Inasmuch as the end inclinations remain unchanged, the
total extension or compression of the material at any given constant
distance from the axis of the rib taken between the two end sections
_F_ and _D_ must be equal to zero. Similarly, whatever may be the
amount or condition of loading, the vertical and horizontal deflections
of either of the ends _F_ or _D_ in relation to the other must be zero,
since no relative motion between these two points can take place. It
is not necessary in these lectures to give the demonstration of the
equations which express the three preceding elastic conditions, but if
_M_ is the general value of the bending moment for any point of the
rib, and if _x_ and _y_ are the horizontal and vertical coordinates of
the centre line of the rib, taking the central point of the section at
either _F_ or _D_ as an origin, those equations, taken in the order in
which the elastic conditions have been named, will be the following,
in which _n_ represents a short length of rib within which the bending
moment _M_ is supposed to remain unchanged.

      F             F             F
    ⎲           ⎲            ⎲
    ⎳ _nM_ = 0; ⎳ _nMx_ = 0; ⎳ _nMy_ = 0.      (57)
      D             D             D

The second and third of these equations express the condition that
the vertical and horizontal deflections respectively of the two ends
in reference to each other shall be zero. The conditions expressed by
equation (57) are constantly used in engineering practice to determine
the bending moments and stresses which exist in the arched rib with
fixed ends. The graphical method is ordinarily used for that purpose,
as its employment is a comparatively simple procedure for a rib whose
curvature is any whatever.

If the rib has hinged joints at the ends, as in Fig. 34, obviously
there can be no bending moment at either of those two points, and hence
the two equations of condition which were required in connection with
Fig. 33 to determine them will not be needed. There is, therefore,
no restriction as to the angle of inclination of the centre line of
the rib at those two points. Again, it is obvious that either end _A_
or _B_ may have vertical movement, i.e., deflection in reference to
the other, without affecting the condition of stress in any member of
the rib; but it is equally obvious that neither _A_ nor _B_ can be
moved horizontally, i.e., deflected in reference to the other, without
producing bending in the rib and developing stresses in the various
members. The unknown quantities in this case are, therefore, only the
horizontal thrust _H_ exerted at the two springing points _A_ and
_B_, and the two vertical reactions, making a total of three unknown
quantities, equations for two of which will be given by equations
(36) and (37). The other equation required is the third expression in
equation (57), expressing the condition that the horizontal deflection
of either of the points _A_ or _B_ in respect to the other is zero,
since the span _AB_ is supposed to remain unchanged. By the application
of the graphical method to this case, as to the preceding, the
employment of equations (36), (37), and (58) will afford an easy and
quick determination of the three unknown quantities, whatever may be
the curvature of the rib.

      A
    ⎲
    ⎳ _nMy_ = 0.      (58)
      B

If the reactions and horizontal thrust _H_ are found, stresses in every
member may readily be computed and the complete design made.

If the arch is three-hinged, as in Fig. 35, the condition that the
bending moment must be zero at the crown _C_ under all conditions of
loading gives a third statical equation independent of the elastic
properties of the structure which, in connection with equations (36)
and (37), give three equations of condition sufficient to determine the
two vertical reactions and the horizontal thrust _H_. In this case, as
has already been stated, no elastic equations of condition are required.

The determination of the end reactions, bending moments, and horizontal
thrust _H_, in these various cases, is all that is necessary in order
to compute with ease and immediately the stresses in every member of
the rib. These computations are obviously the final numerical work
required for the complete design of the structure. These procedures are
always followed, and in precisely the manner indicated, in the design
of arched ribs by civil engineers, whether the rib be articulated,
i.e., with open bracing, or with a solid plate web, like those of the
Washington Bridge across the Harlem River.




CHAPTER XI.


=123. Beams of Combined Steel and Concrete.=[2]—A reference has already
been made to a class of beams and arches recently come into use and now
quite widely employed, composed of steel and concrete, the former being
completely surrounded by and imbedded in the latter. These composite
beams are very extensively used in the floors of fire-proof buildings
as well as for other purposes. Arches of combined concrete and steel
were probably first built in Germany and but a comparatively few years
ago. During the past ten years they have been largely introduced into
this country, and many such structures have not only been designed but
built. The most prominent design of arches of combined concrete and
steel are those of the proposed memorial bridge across the Potomac
River at Washington, for which a first prize was awarded as the result
of a national competition in the early part of 1900. So far as the
bending or flexure of these composite beams and arches is concerned,
the theory is identically the same for both, the formulæ for each of
which are given below. In order to express these formulæ the following
notation will be needed:

[2] For a complete and detailed statement of this whole subject,
including design work, reference should be made to the author’s
“Elasticity and Resistance of Materials.”

[Illustration: MEMORIAL BRIDGE ACROSS THE POTOMAC

AT WASHINGTON D.C.

WM. H. BURR, Civil Engineer.

E. P. CASEY, Associated Architect.

PLAN NO. 2.

Plan Awarded First Prize in National Competition.

River spans 192 feet clear. Total length of structure 3615 feet.]

[Illustration:

WM. H. BURR, Civil Engineer.

E. P. CASEY, Associated Architect.

PLAN NO. 1.

The Towers of this Plan were Recommended by Board of Award to be
Substituted for Those in Plan No. 2.

River spans 283 feet clear. Total length of structure 3437 feet.]

_P_ is the thrust along the arch determined by the methods explained in
the consideration of arched ribs.

_l_ is the distance of the line of the thrust _P_ from the axis of the
arched rib.

_E₁_ and _E₂_ are coefficients of elasticity for the two materials.

_A₁_ and _A₂_ are areas of normal section of the two materials.

_I₁_ and _I₂_ are moments of inertia of _A₁_ and _A₂_ about the neutral
axes of the composite beam or arch sections.

_k₁_ and _k₂_ are intensities of bending stress in the extreme fibres
of the two materials.

_h₁_ and _h₂_ are total depths of the two materials.

_d₁_ and _d₂_ are distances from the neutral axes to farthest fibres of
the two materials; distances to other extreme fibres would be (_h₁-d₁_)
and (_h₂-d₂_).

_W₁_ and _W₂_ are loads, either distributed or concentrated, carried by
the two portions.

_W = W₁ + W₂_ is total load on the beam or arch.

    _q₁ = W₁/W_ and _q₂ = W₂/W_; ∴ _q₁ + q₂_ = 1; _e = E₂/E₁_.

The application of the theory of flexure to the case of a beam or arch
of two different materials, steel and concrete in this case, will give
the following results:

    _M = Pl_; hence _M₁ = q₁Pl_ and _M₂ = q₂Pl_.    (59)

           _W₁      E₁I₁_
    _q₁_ = --- = -----------               (60)
           _W    E₁I₁ + E₂I₂_

           _W₂      E₂I₂_
    _q₂_ = --- = ------------              (61)
           _W    E₁I₁ + E₂I₂_

              _p           Md_
    _k₁_ = ---------- + ---------          (62)
            _A₁ + eA₂   I₁ + eI₂_

              (  _P            Md_      )
    _k₂_ = _e_(---------- + ------------)  (63)
              ( _A₁ + eA₂    I₁ + eI₂_   )

These formulæ exhibit some of the main features of the analysis which
must be used in designing either beams or arches of combined steel and
concrete. In the use of these equations care must be taken to give the
proper sign to the bending moment _M_. They obviously apply to the
combination of any two materials, although at the present time the only
two used in such composite structures are steel and concrete. If the
subscript 1 belongs to the concrete portion, and the subscript 2 to the
steel portion, there may be taken _E₁_ = 1,500,000 to 3,000,000 and
_E₂_ = 30,000,000. Hence _e_ = 20 to 10.

The purpose of introducing the steel into the concrete is to make
available in the composite structure the high tensile resistance
of that metal. A very small steel cross-section is sufficient to
satisfactorily accomplish that purpose. The percentage of the total
composite section represented by the steel will vary somewhat with the
dimensions of the structure and the mode of using the material; it will
usually range from 0.75 per cent to 1.5 per cent of the total section.
The large mass of concrete in which the steel should be completely
imbedded serves not only to afford a large portion of the compressive
resistance required in both arches and beams, but also to preserve the
steel effectively from corrosion. Many experiments have shown that it
requires but a small per cent of steel section to give great tensile
resistance to the composite mass.




CHAPTER XII.


=124. The Masonry Arch.=—The masonry arch is so old that its origin
is lost in antiquity, but its complete theory has been developed with
that of other bridge structures only within the latest period. It is
only possible here to give some of the main features of that theory and
a few of the fundamental ideas on which it is based. It is customary
among engineers to regard the masonry arch as an assemblage of blocks
finely cut to accurate dimensions, so that the assumption of either a
uniform or uniformly varying pressure in the surface of contact between
any two may be at least sufficiently near the truth for all practical
purposes. Although care is taken to make joints between ring-stones
or voussoirs completely cemented or filled with a rich cement mortar,
it is usually the implicit assumption that such joints do not resist
tension. As a matter of fact many arch joints are capable of resisting
considerable tension, but, in consequence of settlement or shrinkage,
cracks in them that may be almost or quite imperceptible frequently
prevent complete continuity. It is, therefore, considered judicious to
determine the stability of the ordinary masonry arch on the assumption
that the joints do not resist tension.

In these observations it is not intended to convey the impression that
no analysts treat the ordinary arch as a continuous elastic masonry
mass, like the composite arches of steel and concrete. Although much
may be said in favor of such treatment for all arches, it is believed
that prolonged experience with arch structures makes it advisable to
neglect any small capacity of resistance to tension which an ordinary
cut-stone masonry joint may possess, in the interests of reasonable
security.

The ring-stones or voussoirs of an arch are usually cut to form
circular or elliptic curves, or to lines which do not differ sensibly
from those curves. The arch-ring may make a complete semicircle, as
in the old Roman arches, or a segment of a semicircle; or the stones
may be arranged to make a pointed arch, like the Gothic; or, again,
a complete semiellipse may be formed, or possibly a segment of that
curve. When a complete semiellipse or complete semicircle is formed,
the arches are said to be full-centred, and in those cases they spring
from a horizontal joint at each end. On the other hand, segmental
arches spring from inclined joints at each end called skew-backs.

=125. Old and New Theories of the Arch.=—In the older theories of the
arch, considered as a series of blocks simply abutting against each
other, the resultant loading on each block was assumed to be vertical.
In the modern theories, on the other hand, the resultant loading on any
block is taken precisely as it is, either vertical or inclined, as the
case may be. Many arches are loaded with earth over their arch-rings.
This earth loading produces a horizontal pressure against each of the
stones, as well as a vertical loading due to its own weight. In such
cases it is necessary to recognize this horizontal or lateral pressure
of the earth, as it is called, as a part of the arch loading.

It is known from the theory of earth pressure that the amount of that
pressure per square foot or any other square unit may vary between
rather wide limits, the upper of which is called the abutting power
of earth, and the latter the conjugate pressure due to its own weight
only. If _w_ is the weight per cubic unit of earth and _x_ the depth
considered, and if φ be the angle of repose of the earth, the abutting
power per square unit will have the value:

              1 + sin φ
    _p_ = _wx_ ---------.   (64)
               1 - sin φ

while the horizontal or conjugate pressure due to the weight of earth
only will be:

              1 - sin φ
    _pʹ_ = _wx_ ---------.             (65)
              1 + sin φ

The use of these formulæ will be illustrated by actual arch
computations.

[Illustration: FIG. 36.]

[Illustration: FIG. 37.]

Fig. 36 is supposed to show a set of ring-stones for an arch of any
curvature whatever. The joints _LM_ and _ON_ represent the skew-backs
or springing joints, while _R_ and _R₁_ represent the supporting
forces or reactions with centres of action at _aʹ_ and _a₁_. The ring
is divided into blocks or pieces by the joints at _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_,
and _e_, the resultant loading or force on each block being given by
the lines with arrow-heads and numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. Fig.
37 represents a force polygon constructed in the ordinary manner by
laying off carefully to scale the two reactions _R_ and _R₁_, together
with the loads or forces numbered 1 to 7, inclusive. By constructing
the so-called polygonal frame in the ring-stones of Fig. 36 in the
usual manner with its lines or sides parallel to the radiating lines in
Fig. 37, as shown by the broken lines, the points _a_, _b_, _c_, etc.,
are found where the resultant forces cut each joint. The line drawn
through those points thus determined is called the line of resistance
of the arch. Obviously, if that line of resistance be determined, the
complete stability or instability of the arch, as the case may be, will
be established. Furthermore, the complete determination of the force
polygon in Fig. 37, and the corresponding polygonal frame drawn in the
arch-ring, constitute all the computations involved in the design of an
arch.

The thrust _T₀_ at the crown, shown both in Fig. 36 and Fig. 37, is
frequently horizontal, although not necessarily so; its value is shown
by Fig. 37. In the older arch theories a principle was enunciated
called the “principle of least resistance.” The thrust _T₀_ is a
fundamental and so-called passive force. That is, its magnitude depends
not only upon its position, but also largely upon the magnitude of
the active forces which represent the loading on the arch-ring. Under
the principle of least resistance it was laid down as a fundamental
proposition, in making arch computations, that this passive force
_T₀_ must be the least possible consistent with the stability of the
structure. While this provisional proposition answered its purpose
well enough, there are other clearer methods of procedure which are
thoroughly rational and involve the employment of no extraneous
considerations other than those attached to the determination of
statical equilibrium.

A scrutiny of the conditions existing in Fig. 36 will show that if the
external forces or loadings on the individual blocks of the ring are
given, four quantities are to be determined, viz., the two reactions
_R_ and _R₁_ and their lines of action. Inasmuch as no elastic
features of the structure are to be considered, there are available
for the determination of these four quantities the three equations of
equilibrium, equations (35), (36), and (37), which are not sufficient
for the purpose. If one line of action, such as that of _R_, be located
by assuming its point of application _aʹ_, the three equations just
named will be sufficient for the determination of the remaining three
equations; and that is precisely the method employed. It is tentative,
but perfectly practicable. If, instead of assuming one of the points
of application of the reactions, we assume both of those points and
construct a trial polygonal frame, it will be necessary to use but two
of the three equations of statical equilibrium. For that purpose there
are employed equations (35) and (36), but in a graphical manner, which
will presently be illustrated.

=126. Stress Conditions in the Arch-ring.=—Before proceeding to the
construction of an actual line of resistance, a little consideration
must be given to the stress conditions in the arch-ring. As the joints
are considered capable of resisting no tension, the dimensions of the
arch-ring must be finally so proportioned that pressure only will exist
in each and every joint. If each centre of pressure, as _a_, _b_, etc.,
in Fig. 36, is found in the middle third of the joint, it is known from
a very simple demonstration in mechanics that no tension will ever
exist in that joint, although the pressure may be zero at one extremity
and a maximum at the other. This is the condition usually imposed in
designing an arch-ring to carry given dead or live loads. It is usually
specified that “the line of resistance of the ring must lie in the
middle third.” It must be borne in mind, however, that the stability
of the ring is perfectly consistent with the location of the line of
resistance outside of the limits of the middle third, provided it is
not so far outside as to induce crushing of the ring-stones. Whenever
that crushing begins the arch is in serious danger and complete failure
is likely to result.

=127. Applications to an Actual Arch.=—These principles will be applied
to the arch-ring shown in Fig. 38, in which the clear span _TU_ is
90 feet. The radius _CO_ of the soffit (as the under surface of the
arch is called) is 50 feet, the ring being circular and segmental. The
uniform thickness of the ring shown at the various joints is assumed
at 4 feet as a trial value. The loading above the ring to the level of
the line _EʹO_ is assumed to be dry earth weighing, when well rammed
in place, 100 pounds per cubic foot. The depth of this earth filling
at the crown _n_ of the arch is taken at 4 feet. The ring-stones are
assumed to be of granite or best quality of limestone, weighing 160
pounds per cubic foot. The thickness or width of arch-ring of one foot
is assumed, as each foot in width is like every other foot, and the
loads are taken for that width of ring. The rectangle _EJJʹEʹ_ is
supposed to represent a moving load covering one half of the span and
averaging 500 pounds per linear foot; in other words, averaging 500
pounds per square foot of upper surface projected in the line _EʹO_.
The total length of the arch-ring, measured on the soffit, is about
113 feet, and it is divided into ten equal portions for the purpose of
convenient computation. The radial joints so located are as shown at
_de_, _fg_, _hk_. From the points where these joints cut the extrados
(as the upper surface of the arch-ring is called) vertical broken lines
are erected, as shown in Fig. 38.

[Illustration: FIG. 38.]

The horizontal line drawn to the left from _f_ gives the vertical
projection of that part of the extrados between _d_ and _f_, and the
horizontal earth pressure on _df_ will be precisely the same in amount
as that on the vertical projection of _df_, as just found. In the same
manner the horizontal earth pressure on that part of the extrados
between any two adjacent joints may be found. The mid-depths of these
vertical projections below the line _E′O_ are to be carefully measured
by scale and then used for the values of _x_ in equations (64) and
(65), which now become equations (66) and (67), as the angle of repose
φ is taken to correspond to a slope of earth surface of 1 vertical on
1½ horizontal.

    _p = 3.51wx._        (66)

    _pʹ = 0.285wx._      (67)

The horizontal earth pressures thus found are as follows:

    _h₁_ = { 101,500 pounds;    _h₃_ = { 30,625 pounds;
           {   8,700   ”               {  2,625   ”

    _h₂_ = { 59,500    ”        _h₄_ = {  9,800   ”
           {  5,100    ”               {    840   ”

These quantities _h₁_, etc., are found by multiplying the two
intensities _p_ and _p′_ by the vertical projections of the surface
on which they act. The larger values are found by equation (66) and
represent the abutting power of the earth, while the smaller values
are found by equation (67), and represent the horizontal or conjugate
pressure of the earth due to its own weight only. The actual horizontal
earth pressure against the arch-ring may lie anywhere between these
limits.

The weights of the moving load, earth, and ring-stones between each
pair of vertical lines and radial joints shown in Fig. 38 are next to
be determined, and they are as follows:

    _W₁_ = 27,300 pounds; _W₆_  = 12,300 pounds;
    _W₂_ = 27,900   ”     _W₇_  = 15,550   ”
    _W₃_ = 24,500   ”     _W₈_  = 19,500   ”
    _W₄_ = 21,300   ”     _W₉_  = 19,400   ”
    _W₅_ = 18,300   ”     _W₁₀_ = 24,300   ”

The centres of gravity of these various vertical forces are shown in
Fig. 38 at the points _W₁_, _W₂_, etc. The triangles of forces shown
in that figure and composed, each one, of a vertical and horizontal
force as described, are laid down in actual position on the arch-ring,
as shown. All data are thus secured for completing the force polygon
and polygonal frame or line of resistance. It will be assumed that
the reactions _R_ and _R′_ cut the springing joints at _c_ and _a_,
respectively, one third of the width of the joint from the soffit,
and it will further be assumed that _b_, the mid-point of the joint
at the crown, is also in the line of resistance. The assumption of
the location of these three points is made for the reason, as is well
known, that with a given system of forces a polygonal frame may be
found which will pass through any three points in the ring.

[Illustration: FIG. 39.]

The force polygon _B_, 1, 2, 3, ..., 10, _A_, Fig. 39, is then drawn
with the loadings on each ring segment found as already explained.
The horizontal forces are taken as represented by the smaller values
of _h₁_, _h₂_, _h₃_, _h₄_. Other force polygons with larger values of
these horizontal forces were tried and not found satisfactory. Having
constructed the force polygon and assumed the trial pole _Pʹ_, the
radial lines are drawn from it as shown in Fig. 39. The polygonal
frame shown in broken lines in Fig. 38 results from this trial pole.
The frame practically passes through _b_ and _c_, but leaves the ring,
passing outside of it, above the joint _VU_. The point _q_ in this
frame is vertically above _a_. The “three-point” method of finding the
frame that will pass through _a_, _b_, and _c_ was then employed. The
line _A6_, Fig. 39, was drawn; then _P′D_ was drawn parallel to _qb_,
Fig. 38 (not shown); after which _PD_ was drawn parallel to _ab_,
until it intercepted the horizontal line _PQ_, the line _PʹQ_ having
previously been drawn parallel to _qc_ (not shown). The final pole
_P_ was thus found. The polygonal frame shown in full lines in the
arch-ring was then drawn with sides parallel to the lines radiating
from _P_, all in accordance with the usual methods for such graphic
analysis. That polygonal frame lies within the middle third of the
arch-ring, although at three points it touches the limit of the middle
third. The arch, therefore, is stable.

This construction shows that, with the actual loading of the ring, a
line of resistance can be found lying within the middle third; its
stability under the conditions assumed is, therefore, demonstrated.
It does not follow that the line of resistance as determined must
necessarily exist, since there may be others located still more
favorably for stability. This indetermination results from the fact
already observed that the equations of statical equilibrium are not
sufficient in number to determine the four unknown quantities (the
two horizontal and the two vertical reactions); but the process of
demonstrating the stability of the arch-ring is simple and sufficient
for all ordinary purposes. The line of resistance found, if not the
true one, is so near to it that no sensible waste of material is
involved in employing it. This indetermination has prompted some
engineers and other analysts to consider all arch-rings as elastic,
thus obtaining other equations of condition. While such a procedure may
be permissible, it is scarcely necessary, and perhaps not advisable, in
view of the fact that many joints of cut-stone arches become slightly
open by very small cracks, resulting possibly from unequal settlement,
quite harmless in themselves, having practically no effect upon the
stability of the structure.

=128. Intensities of Pressure in the Arch-ring.=—It still remains to
ascertain whether the actual pressures of masonry in the arch-ring are
too high or not. The greatest single force shown in the force polygon
in Fig. 39 is the reaction _R_, having a value by scale of 122,000
pounds, under the left end of the arch, and it is supposed to act at
the limit of the middle third of the joint. Hence the average pressure
on that joint will be

    122,000 × 2
    ----------- = 61,000 pounds per square foot.
         4

This value may be taken as satisfactory for granite or the best quality
of limestone.

Again, it is necessary in bridges, as in some other structures, to
determine whether there is any liability of stones to slip on each
other. In order that motion shall take place the resultant forces
acting on the surface of a stone joint must have an inclination to
that surface less than a value which is not well determined and which
depends upon the condition of the surface of the stone; it certainly
must be less than 70°. The inclination of every resultant force in Fig.
38 to the surface on which it acts is considerably greater than that
value and, hence, the stability of friction is certainly secured.

=129. Permissible Working Pressures.=—The working values of pressures
permissible on cut-stone and brick or other masonry must be inferred
from the results of the actual tests of such classes of masonry in
connection with the results of experience with structures in which the
actual pressures existing are known. It is safe to state that with
such classes of material as are used in the best grade of engineering
structures these pressures will generally be found not to exceed the
following limits:

Concrete, 20,000 to 40,000 pounds per square foot.

Cement rubble, same values.

Hard-burned brick, cement mortar joints, 30,000 to 50,000 pounds per
square foot.

Limestone ashlar, 40,000 to 60,000 pounds per square foot.

Granite ashlar, 50,000 to 70,000 pounds per square foot.

The masonry arch is at the same time the most graceful and the most
substantial and durable of all bridge structures, and it is deservedly
coming to be more and more used in modern bridge practice. One of the
greatest railroad corporations in the United States has, for a number
of years, been substituting, wherever practicable, masonry arches for
the iron and steel structures replaced. The high degree of excellence
already developed in this country in the manufacture of the best grades
of hydraulic cement at reasonable prices, and the abundance of cut
stone, has brought this type of structure within the limits of a sound
economy where cost but a few years ago would have excluded it. It is
obviously limited in use to spans that are not very great but yet
considerably longer than any hitherto constructed.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: FIG. 40.—Elevation of Luxemburg Bridge and Sections of
Main Span.]

=130. Largest Arch Spans.=—The longest arch span yet built has been but
recently completed in Germany at the city of Luxemburg. This bridge has
a span of 275.5 feet and a rise of 101.8 feet. It is rather peculiarly
built in two parallel parts separated 19.5 feet in the clear, the space
between being spanned by slabs or beams of combined concrete and steel.
The arch-ring is 4.75 feet thick at the crown and 7.18 feet thick at a
point 53.14 feet vertically below the crown where it joins the spandrel
masonry. The roadway is about 52.5 feet wide and 144.5 feet above the
water in the Petrusse River, which it spans.

[Illustration: Cabin John Bridge, near Washington, D. C.]

The longest arch in this country is known as the Cabin John Bridge of
220 feet span and 57.5 feet rise. It is a segmental arch and is located
a short distance from the city of Washington, carrying the aqueduct for
the water-supply of that city. These lengths of span may be exceeded in
good ordinary masonry construction, but the high degree of strength and
comparative lightness which characterize the combination of steel and
concrete will enable bridges to be built in considerably greater spans
than any yet contemplated in cut-stone masonry.




CHAPTER XIII.


=131. Cantilever and Stiffened Suspension Bridges.=—There are two other
types of bridges of later development which have, in recent years,
become prominent by remarkable examples of both completed structure
and design; they are known as the cantilever and stiffened suspension
bridges. Both are adapted to long spans, although the latter may be
applied to much longer spans than the former. A cantilever structure,
with a main span of 1800 feet between centres of piers, is now in
process of construction across the St. Lawrence River at Quebec, while
the well-known Forth Bridge across the Firth of Forth in Scotland has
a main span of 1710 feet. The longest stiffened suspension bridge yet
constructed is the New York and Brooklyn Bridge, with a river span
of about 1595.5 feet between centres of towers, but the stiffened
suspension system has been shown by actual design to be applicable to
spans of more than 3200 feet, with material now commercially produced.

[Illustration: FIG. 41.]

[Illustration: FIG. 42.—Monongahela Bridge—Pittsburgh, Carnegie &
Western Railroad (Wabash), at Pittsburgh.]

=132. Cantilever Bridges.=—Figs. 41 and 42 exhibit in skeleton outline
two prominent cantilever designs for structures in this country.
That shown in Fig. 41 was intended for a bridge across the Hudson
River between Sixtieth and Seventieth streets, New York City. The
main central opening has a span of 1800 feet, and a length of 2000
feet between centres of towers. Fig. 42 shows the Monongahela River
cantilever bridge,[3] now being built at Pittsburgh, Penn. Both figures
exhibit the prominent features of the cantilever system. The main parts
are the towers, at each end of the centre span, which are 534.5 feet
high in the North River Bridge and 135 feet high in the Monongahela
River structure, and the central main or river span with its simple
non-continuous truss hung from the ends of the cantilever brackets or
arms which flank it on both sides. These cantilever arms are simply
projecting trusses continuous with the shore- or anchor-arms. They
rest on the piers at either end of the main span, as a lever rests
on its fulcrum. This arrangement requires the shore extremities or
the anchor-arms to be anchored down by a heavy weight formed by the
masonry piers at those points. Recapitulating and starting from the two
shore ends of the structure, there are the anchor-spans, continuous
at the towers, with the cantilever arms projecting outward toward the
centre of the main opening and supporting at their ends the suspended
truss, which is a simple, non-continuous one. It is thus evident that
the cantilever bridge is a structure composed of continuous trusses
with points of contraflexure permanently fixed at the ends of the
suspended span. The greatest bending moments are at the towers, and
the great depth at that point is given for the purpose of affording
adequate resistance to those moments by the members of the structure.
The following statement shows some elements of the more prominent
cantilever bridges of this country and of the Forth Bridge:

[3] This bridge was designed by and is being constructed under the
direction of Messrs. Boller and Hodge, Consulting Engineers, New York
City.

                       Length of Cantilever
          Name.         Opening, Centre to   Total Length.
                        Centre of Towers.

    Pittsburgh             812   feet.        1504 feet.
    Red Rock (Colo.)       660     ”           990   ”
    Memphis (Tenn.)        790.48  ”          2378.2 ”
    Forth                 1710     ”          5330   ”

The arrangement of web members of cantilever structures is designed to
be such as will transfer the loads from the points of application to
the points of support in the shortest and most direct paths. Both Figs.
41 and 42 show these general results accomplished by an advantageous
arrangement of web members.

It is interesting to note that the first cantilever bridge designed
and built in this country was constructed in 1871. This structure was
designed and erected by the late C. Shaler Smith, a prominent civil
engineer of his day.

=133. Stiffened Suspension Bridges.=—The stiffened suspension bridge is
a structure radically different in its main features and its mode of
transferring load to points of support from any heretofore considered,
except arched ribs. When a load is supported by a beam or truss, the
stresses, either in the web members of the truss or in the solid web
of the beams, travel up and down those members in zigzag directions
with a relatively large amount of metal required for that kind of
transference. That metal is represented by the weight of the web
members of the truss and of the solid web of the beam. Again, there are
two sets of truss members—the chords or flanges, one of which sustains
tension and the other an equal amount of compression. The greater part
of this metal must be so placed and used that the working intensities
of stress are comparatively small. This is particularly the case in
compression members of both chords and webs which constitute the
greater portion of the weight of the truss. All compression members
are known as long columns which sustain not only direct compression
but bending, and the amount of stress or load which they carry per
square inch is relatively small, decreasing as the length increases.
For all these reasons the amount of metal required for both beams and
trusses is comparatively large. In suspension bridges, however, the
conditions requiring the employment of a relatively large amount of
metal with relatively small unit stresses are absent. The main members
of a suspension bridge are the cables and the stiffening trusses, the
latter being light in reference to the length of span. The cables are
subjected to tension only, which is the most economical of all methods
of using metal. A member in tension tends to straighten itself, so
that it is never subjected to bending by the load which it carries.
The opposite condition exists with compression members. Again, grades
of steel possessing the highest ultimate resistance may be used in the
manufacture of cables. It is well known that wire is the strongest form
in which either wrought-iron or steel can be manufactured. While the
ultimate tensile resistance of ordinary structural steel will seldom
rise above 70,000 pounds per square inch, steel wire, suitable to be
used in suspension-bridge cables, may be depended upon, at the present
time, to give an ultimate resistance of at least 180,000 pounds per
square inch. The elastic limit of ordinary structural steel is but
little above half its ultimate resistance, while the elastic limit
of the steel used in suspension-bridge cables is probably not less
than three fourths of its ultimate resistance. It is seen, therefore,
that the high resistance of steel wire makes the steel cable of the
suspension bridge a remarkably economical application of metal to
structural purposes.

The latest example of stiffened suspension-bridge is the new East River
Bridge reaching across the East River from Broadway in Brooklyn to
Delancey Street, New York City, now being built, with a main span of
1600 feet between centres of towers. The entire length of the metal
structure is 7200 feet, and the elevation of the centres of cable at
the tops of the towers is 333 feet above mean high water.

Fig. 43 shows a view of this bridge. Its three principal divisions are
the cables, the stiffening trusses, and the towers. The latter afford
suitable points of support for the cables, which not only extend over
the river span, but are carried back to points on the land where they
are securely attached to a heavy mass of anchorage masonry. These
anchorages must be sufficiently heavy to prevent any load which may
come upon the bridge from moving them by the pull of the cables. It is
usual to make these masses so great that they are capable of resisting
from two to two and a half times the pull of the cables.

[Illustration: FIG. 43.—New East River Bridge.]

=134. The Stiffening Truss.=—The function of the stiffening trusses
is peculiar and imperatively essential to the proper action of the
whole system. If they are absent and a weight should be placed upon
the cable at any point, a deep sag at that point would result. If a
moving load should attempt to pass along a roadway supported by a cable
only, the latter would be greatly distorted, and it would be impossible
to use such a structure for ordinary traffic. Some means must then
be employed by which the cable shall maintain essentially the same
shape and position, whatever may be the amount of loading. It can be
readily shown that if any perfectly flexible suspension-bridge cable
carries a load of uniform intensity over the span from one tower to
the other, the curve of the cable will be a parabola, with its vertex
at the lowest point. Furthermore, it can also be shown that if any
portion of the span be subjected to a uniform load, the corresponding
portion of the cable will also assume a parabolic curve. It is assumed
in all ordinary suspension-bridge design that the total weight of the
structure, including the cables and the suspension-rods which connect
the stiffening trusses to the cable, is uniformly distributed over
the span, and that assumption is essentially correct. So far as the
weight of the structure is concerned, therefore, the curve of the cable
will always be parabolic. It only remains, therefore, to devise such
stiffening trusses as will cause any moving load passing on or over
the bridge to be carried uniformly to the cables throughout the entire
span. This condition means that if any moving load whatever covers any
portion of the span, the corresponding pull of the suspension-rods on
the cables must be uniform from one tower to the other, and that result
can be practically accomplished by the proper design of stiffening
trusses; it is the complete function of those trusses to perform just
that duty.

=135. Location and Arrangement of Stiffening Trusses.=—It has been,
and is at the present time to a considerable extent, an open question
as to the best location and arrangement of the stiffening trusses. The
more common method in structures built is that illustrated by the New
York and Brooklyn and the new East River bridges. Those stiffening
trusses are uniform in depth, extending from one tower to the other, or
into the land spans, and connected with the cables by suspension-rods
running from the latter down to the lower chords of the trusses. It is
obvious that the floor along which the moving load is carried must have
considerable transverse stiffness, and hence it may appear advisable
to place the stiffening trusses so that the floor may be carried by
them. On the other hand, some civil engineers maintain that it is a
better distribution of stiffening metal to place it where the cables
themselves may form members of the stiffening trusses, with a view to
greater economy of material.

Figs. 44, 45, and 46 illustrate some of the principal proposed methods
of constructing stiffening trusses in direct connection with the
cables. The structure shown in Fig. 44 illustrates the skeleton design
of the Point Bridge at Pittsburgh. The curved member is a parabolic
cable composed of eye-bars. This parabolic cable carries the entire
weight of the structure and moving load when uniformly distributed. If
a single weight rests at the centre, the two straight members of the
upper chord may be assumed to carry it. If a single weight rests at any
other point of the span, it will be distributed by the bracing between
the straight and curved members of the stiffening truss. Obviously the
most unbalanced loading will occur when one half of the span is covered
with moving load. In that case the bowstring stiffening truss in either
half of Fig. 44 will make the required distribution and prevent the
parabolic tension member from changing its form.

[Illustration: FIG. 44.]

[Illustration: FIG. 45.]

[Illustration: FIG. 46.]

The type of bracing shown in Fig. 45 possesses some advantages of
a peculiar nature. Each curved lower chord of the stiffening truss
corresponds to the position of the perfectly flexible cable with
the moving load covering that half of the span which belongs to the
greatest sag of the cable. The two parabolic cables thus cross each
other in a symmetrical manner at the centre of the span. If the moving
load covers the entire span, the line of resistance or centre line of
imaginary cable will be the parabola, shown by the broken line midway
along each crescent stiffening truss. The diagonal bracing placed
between the cables is so distributed and applied as to maintain the
positions of cables under all conditions of loading.

The mode of constructing the stiffening truss between two cables, shown
in Fig. 46, is that adopted by Mr. G. Lindenthal in his design for a
proposed stiffened suspension bridge across the Hudson River with a
span of about 3000 feet. The two cables are parabolic in curvature and
may be either concentric or parallel. This system of stiffening bracing
possesses some advantages of uniformity and is well placed to secure
efficient results. The same system has been used in suspension bridges
of short span by Mr. Lindenthal at both St. Louis and Pittsburgh. The
stiffening bracing produces practically a continuous stiffening truss
from one tower to the other, whereas the systems shown in Figs. 44 and
45 involve practically a joint at the centre of the span.

In all these three types of vertical stiffness the floor is designed
to meet only the exigencies of local loading, being connected with the
stiffening truss above by suspension bars or rods, preferably of stiff
section.

When stiffening trusses are placed along the line of the floor, as in
the case of the two East River bridges, to which reference has already
been made, those trusses need not necessarily be of uniform depth, and
they may be continuous from tower to tower or jointed at the centre,
like those of the New York and Brooklyn suspension bridge. This centre
joint detracts a little from the stiffness of the structure, but in a
proper design this is not serious.

=136. Division of Load between Cables and Stiffening Truss.=—In a case
where continuous stiffening trusses are employed it is obvious that
they may carry some portion of the moving load as ordinary trusses.
The portion so carried will be that which is required to make the
deflection of the stiffening truss equal to that of the cable added
to the stretch of the suspension-rods. In the old theory of the
stiffening truss constructed along the floor of the bridge this effect
was ignored, and the computations for the stresses in those trusses
were made by the aid of equations of statical equilibrium only. That
assumption, that the cable carried the entire load, was necessary
to remove the ambiguity which would otherwise exist. In modern
suspension-bridge design those trusses may be assumed continuous from
tower to tower with their ends anchored at the towers, or they may be
designed to be carried continuously through portions of the land spans
and held at their extremities by struts reaching down to anchorages,
so that those ends may never rise nor fall, but move horizontally if
required. If there are no pin-joints in the trusses at the centre
and ends of the main span, equations of statical equilibrium are not
sufficient to enable the reactions under the trusses and the horizontal
component of cable tension to be found.

One of the best methods of procedure for such cases is that of
least work, in which the horizontal component of cable tension is
so found that the total work performed in the elastic deflection of
the stiffening trusses, suspension-rods, cables, and towers is a
minimum. After having found this horizontal component of the cable
tension and the reactions under the stiffening trusses, the stresses
in all the members of the entire structure can be at once determined.
It is obvious that the stiffening truss and the cables must deflect
together. It is equally evident that the deeper the stiffening trusses
are the more load will be required to deflect them to any given
amount, and hence that the deeper they are the more load they will
carry independently of the cable. It is desirable to throw as much of
the duty of carrying loads upon the cables as possible. It therefore
follows that the stiffening trusses should be made as shallow as the
proper discharge of their stiffening duties will permit.

=137. Stresses in Cables and Moments and Shears in Trusses.=—The
necessary limits of this discussion will not permit even the simplest
analyses to be given. It is evident, however, that the greatest
cable stresses will exist at the tops of the towers, and that if the
horizontal component of cable tension be found by any proper method,
the stress at any other point will be equal to that horizontal
component multiplied by the secant of cable inclination to a horizontal
line, it being supposed that the suspenders are found in a vertical
plane.

If the stiffening trusses are jointed at the centre of the main span,
as well as at the ends, the simple equations of statical equilibrium
are sufficient in number to make all computations, for the reason that
the centre pin-joint gives the additional condition that, whatever
may be the amount or distribution of loading, the centre moment must
be zero. If _l_ is the length of main or centre span and _p_ the
moving load per linear foot of span, and if the stiffening trusses run
from tower to tower, the following equations will give their greatest
moments and shears both by the old and new theory of the stiffening
truss.

                 _p_ = load per lin. ft.,   _l_ = length of span in ft.,
                         Old theory.                New theory.

   Max. moment       _M_ = 0.01856_pl_²     _M_ = 0.01652_pl_²}no centre
   Max. shear        _S_ =  ⅛_pl_           _S_ = ⅛_pl_       }  hinge.
   With centre hinge _M_ = 0.01883_pl_² and _S_ = ⅛_pl_

The details of the theory of stiffening trusses for suspension
bridges have been well developed during the past few years and are
fully exhibited in modern engineering literature. The long spans
requiring stiffened suspension bridges are usually found over navigable
streams, and hence those bridges must be placed at comparatively
high elevations. This is illustrated by the clear height of 135 feet
required under the East River suspension-bridge structures already
completed and in progress. Furthermore, the heights of towers above
the lowest points of the cables usually run from one eighth to one
twelfth of the span. These features expose the entire structure to
comparatively high wind pressures, which must be carefully provided
against. This is done by the requisite lateral bracing between the
stiffening trusses and by what is called the cradling of the cables.
The latter expression simply means that the cables as they are built
are swung out of a vertical plane and toward the axis of the structure,
being held in that position by suitable details. The cables on opposite
sides of the bridge are thus moved in toward each other so as to
produce increased stability against lateral movement. Occasionally
horizontal cables are stretched between the towers in parabolic curves
in order to resist horizontal pressures, just as the main cables carry
vertical loads. This matter of stability against lateral wind pressures
requires and receives the same degree of careful consideration in
design as that accorded to the effects of vertical loading. The same
general observation applies also to the design of the towers.

=138. Thermal Stresses and Moments in Stiffened Suspension
Bridges.=—All material used in engineering structures expands and
contracts with rising and falling temperatures to such an extent
that the resulting motions must be provided for in structures of
considerable magnitude. In ordinary truss-bridges one end is supported
upon rollers, so that as the span changes its length the truss ends
move the required amount upon the rollers. In the case of stiffened
suspension bridges, however, the ends of the cables at the anchorages
are rigidly fixed, so that any adjustment required by change of
temperature must be consistent with the change of length of cable
between the anchorages. The backstays, which are those portions of
the cables extending from the anchorages to the tops of the towers,
expand and contract precisely as do the portions of the cable between
the tops of the towers. As the cables lengthen, therefore, the sag or
rise at the centre of the main span will be due to the change in the
entire length of cable from anchorage to anchorage. In order to meet
this condition it is usual to support the cables at the tops of the
towers on seats called saddles which rest upon rollers, so as to afford
any motion that may be required. Designs have been made in which the
cables are fixed to the tops of steel towers. In such cases changes
of temperature would subject the towers to considerable bending which
would be provided for in the design.

The rise and fall at the centres of long spans of stiffened suspension
bridges is considerable; indeed, for a variation of 120° Fahr. the
centre of the New York and Brooklyn Bridge changes its elevation by
4.6 feet if the saddles are free to move, as intended. In the case of
a stiffened suspension bridge designed to cross the North River at New
York City with a main span of 3200 feet a variation of 120° Fahr. in
temperature would produce a change of elevation of the centre of the
span of 6.36 feet. Such thermal motions in the structure obviously will
produce stresses of considerable magnitude in various parts of the
stiffening trusses, all of which are invariably recognized and provided
for in good design.

=139. Formation of the Cables.=—At the present time suspension-bridge
cables are made by grouping together in one cylindrical mass a large
number of so-called strands or individual small cables, each composed
of a large number of parallel wires about one sixth of an inch in
diameter. The four cables of the New York and Brooklyn Bridge are each
composed of 19 strands, each of the latter containing 332 parallel
wires, making a total of 6308 wires, the cables themselves being
15½ inches in diameter. The wire is No. 7 gauge, i.e., 0.18 inch in
diameter. In the new East River Bridge each of the four cables is 18¼
inches in diameter and contains 37 strands, each strand being composed
of 208 wires all laid parallel to each other, or a total of 7696 wires.
The size of the wire is No. 6 (Roebling) gauge, i.e., 0.192 inch in
diameter. These strands are formed by laying wire by wire, each in
its proper place. The strands are then bound together into a single
cable, around which is tightly wound a sheathing or casing of smaller
wire, 0.134 inch in diameter for the New York and Brooklyn Bridge. The
tightness of this binding wire insures the unity of the whole cable,
each wire having been placed in its original position so as to take a
tension equal to that of each of the other wires. The suspension-rods
are usually of wire cables and are attached by suitable details to the
lower chords of the stiffening truss, also by specially designed clamps
to the cable. The stiffening trusses are usually built with all riveted
joints, so as to secure the greatest possible stiffness from end to
end. The stiffened suspension bridge has been shown by experience, as
well as by theory, to be well adapted to carry railroad traffic over
long spans.

=140. Economical Limits of Spans.=—In the past, suspension bridges
have, in a number of cases, been built for comparatively short spans,
but it is well recognized among engineers that their economical use
must be found for spans of comparatively great length. While definite
lower limits cannot now be assigned to such spans, it is probable that
with present materials of construction and with available shop and
mill capacities the ordinary truss-bridge may be economically used up
to spans approximately 700 to 800 feet, and that above that limit the
cantilever system is economically applicable to lengths of span not yet
determined but probably between 1600 and 2000 feet. The special field
of economical employment of the long-span stiffened suspension bridge
will be found at the upper limit of the cantilever system. So far as
present investigations indicate, the stiffened suspension type of
structure may be employed to advantage from about 1800 feet up to the
maximum practicable length of span not yet assignable, but perhaps in
the vicinity of 4000 feet. Obviously such limits are approximate only
and may be pushed upward by further improvements in the production of
material and in the enlargement of both shop and mill capacity.




PART III.

_WATER-WORKS FOR CITIES AND TOWNS._




CHAPTER XIV.


=141. Introductory.=—A preceding lecture in this course has shown to
what an advanced state the public supply of water to large cities was
developed in ancient times. The old Romans, Greeks, Egyptians, and
other ancient peoples evidently possessed an adequate appreciation of
the value of efficient systems of public water-supply. Very curiously
that appreciation diminished so greatly as almost to disappear
during the middle ages. The demoralization of public spirit and the
decrease of national power which followed the fall of Rome induced, in
their turn, among other things, a neglect of the works of the great
water system of Rome, entailing their partial destruction. The same
retrogression in civilization seemed to affect other ancient nations
as well, until probably the lowest state of the use of public waters
and the construction of public water systems was reached somewhere
between A.D. 1000 and A.D. 1300 or 1400. Without reasonable doubt the
terrible epidemics or plagues of the middle ages can be charged to the
absence of suitable water-supplies and affiliated consequences. During
that middle period of the absence of scientific knowledge and any
apparent desire to acquire it, sanitary works and consequently sanitary
conditions of life were absolutely neglected. No progress whatever was
made toward reaching those conditions so imperative in large centres of
population for the well-being of the community. Grossly polluted waters
were constantly used for public and private supplies, and no efforts
whatever were made among the masses toward the suitable disposition
of refuse matters or, in a word, to attain to sanitary conditions of
living.

A few important works were completed, particularly in Spain, but
nothing indicative of general relief from the depths of ignorance and
sanitary demoralization to which the greater portion of the civilized
world had sunk at that time. The city of Paris took all its water from
the Seine, except that which was supplied by a small aqueduct built in
1183. So small was the supply, aside from the water obtained from the
river, that in 1550 it is estimated that the former amounted to about
one quart only per head of population per day. The situation in London
was equally bad, for it was only in the first half of the thirteenth
century that spring-water was brought to the city by means of lead
pipes and masonry conduits. Public water-works began to be constructed
in Germany on a small scale in the early part of the fifteenth century.
Obviously no pumps were available in those early days of water-supply,
so that the small systems which have been mentioned were of the
gravity class; that is, the water flowed naturally in open or closed
channels from its sources to the points of consumption. Pumps of a
simple and crude type first began to be used at a point on the old
London Bridge in 1582, and in Hanover in 1527. Subsequently to those
dates other pumps were set up on London Bridge, and installations
of the same class of machinery were made in Paris in 1608, usually
operated by water-power in some simple manner, as by the force of the
water-currents. In 1624 the Paris supply received a reinforcement of
200,000 gallons per day by the completion of the aqueduct Arcueil. The
New River Company was incorporated in 1619 for the partial supply of
the city of London, and it began to lay its pipes at that time. As its
name indicates, it took its supply from New River, and the inception of
its business is believed to mark the first application of the principle
of supplying each house with water. This company is still in existence
and furnishes a considerable portion of the present London supply.

=142. First Steam-pumps.=—The application of steam to the creation or
development of power by Watt, near the end of the eighteenth century,
stimulated greatly the construction of water-works, as it offered a
very convenient and economical system of pumping. It seems probable
that the first steam-pumps were used in London in 1761. Twenty years
later a steam-pump was erected in Paris, while another was installed in
1783. The second steam-pump in London was probably constructed in 1787.
In all these earlier instances of the use of steam-pumps river supplies
were naturally used.

=143. Water-supply of Paris and London.=—After the early employment of
steam pumping-machinery demonstrated its great efficiency for public
water-supplies, the extension of the latter became more rapid, and
since 1800 the supplies of the two great cities of London and Paris
have been greatly increased. As late as 1890 the Paris supply amounted
to about 65 gallons per head of population, one fourth of which was
used as potable, being drawn from springs, while three fourths, drawn
from rivers, was used for street-cleaning or other public purposes.
This supply, however, was found inadequate and was re-enforced in 1892
by an addition of 30,000,000 gallons per day of potable water brought
to the city by an aqueduct 63 miles long. Another addition of about
15,000,000 gallons has been provided more recently.

Rather curiously the water-supply of London is afforded by eight
private companies, one of which is the old New River Company already
mentioned. These companies, with one exception, draw their supply
mainly from the rivers Thames and Lea, all such water being filtered.
The remaining company draws its water from deep wells driven into the
chalk. The total population supplied amounts to about 5,500,000, the
rate of supply being thus less than 45 gallons per head per day.

=144. Early Water-pipes.=—Inasmuch as the use of cast-iron for pipes
was only begun about the year 1800, other materials were used prior
to that date. As is well known, the pipes used in ancient water-works
were either of lead or earthenware. In the eighteenth century wooden
pipes made of logs with their centres bored out were used, sometimes
6 or 7 inches in diameter. As many lines of these log pipes were used
as needed to conduct a single line of supply. In the earlier portion
of the nineteenth century such log pipes, usually of pine or spruce,
were used by the old Manhattan Company for the supply of New York
City. A section of such a wooden pipe, with a bore of about 2½ inches
is preserved in the museum of the Department of Civil-Engineering of
Columbia University. Large quantities of such pipes were formerly used.

=145. Earliest Water-supplies in the United States.=—The earliest
system of public water-supply in this country was completed for the
city of Boston in 1652. This was a gravity system. It is believed
that the first pumping-machinery for such a supply was set up for the
town of Bethlehem, Pa., and put in operation in 1754. Subsequently
water-supplies were completed for Providence, R. I., 1772, and for
Morristown, N. J., in 1791; the latter has maintained a continuous
existence since that date. The first use of steam pumping-machinery in
this country was in Philadelphia in 1800. This machinery, curiously
enough, was largely of wood, including some portions of the boiler; it
was necessarily very crude and would perform with 100 pounds of coal
only about one twenty-fifth or one thirtieth of what may be expected
from first-class pumping-machinery at the present time. Other cities
and towns soon began to follow the lead of these earlier municipalities
in the construction of public water-supplies, but the principal
development in this class of public works has taken place since about
1850.

It is estimated that the total population supplied in 1880 was about
12,000,000, which rose to about 23,000,000 in 1890, and it is probably
not less than 50,000,000 at the present time.

=146. Quality and Uses of Public Water-supply.=—Advances in the public
supplies in this country have been made rather in the line of quantity
than quality. Insufficient attention has been given both to the
quality of the original supply and to the character of the reservoirs
in which it is gathered until within possibly the past decade. A few
cities like Boston have scrutinized with care both the quality of the
water and the character of the bottom and banks of reservoirs, and
have spared neither means nor expense to acquire a high degree of
excellence in their potable water. The same observations can be applied
to a few other large cities, but to a few only. The realization of
the dependence of public health upon the character of water-supply,
however, has been rapidly extending, and it will doubtless be but a
short time before the care exercised in collecting and preparing water
for public use will be as great in this country as in Europe, where few
large cities omit the filtration of public waters.

The distribution of water supplied for public use is not limited to
domestic purposes, although that class of consumption controls public
health so far as it is affected by the consumption of water. The
applications of water to such public purposes as street-cleaning and
the extinguishing of fires are of the greatest importance and must
receive most careful consideration. Again, the so-called system of
water-carriage in the disposal of domestic and manufacturing wastes,
constituting the field of sewage-disposal, depends wholly upon the
efficiency of the water-supply.

=147. Amount of Public Water-supply.=—The first question confronting
an engineer in the design of public water-supply is the amount which
should be provided, usually stated on the basis of an estimated
quantity per head of population. This is not in all cases completely
rational, but it is by far the best basis available. If the
water-supply is designed for a small city or town previously supplied
by wells or other individual sources, the first year’s consumption
will be low per head of population for the reason that many people
will retain their own sources instead of taking a share of the public
supply. As time elapses that portion of population decreases quite
rapidly in numbers, and in a comparatively few years practically the
whole population will use the public supply. In communities, therefore,
where public systems have long existed and it is desired either to
add to the old supply or to install new ones, the only safe basis of
estimate is the entire population.

=148. Increase of Daily Consumption and the Division of that
Consumption.=—The amount of water required per head of population might
naturally be assumed identical with the past consumption, but that
would frequently be incorrect. It is one of the most prominent features
of the history of public water-supplies in this country that the
consumption per head of population has increased with great rapidity
from the early years of the installation of the different systems,
for reasons both legitimate and illegitimate. The daily average
consumption of water from the Cochituate Works of the Boston supply
increased from 42 gallons per head of population in 1850 to 107 gallons
in 1893, and in the Mystic Works of the same supply the increase was
from 27 gallons in 1865 to 89 gallons in 1894. Again, the daily average
consumption in Chicago rose from 43 gallons per head per day in 1860
to 147 gallons in 1893, while in Philadelphia during the same period
the increase was from 36 gallons per head per day to 150 gallons. In
Cambridge, Mass., the increase in daily average consumption per head
of population was from 44 gallons in 1870 to 70 gallons in 1894. These
instances are sufficient to show that, under existing conditions, the
daily consumption was increased at a rapid rate in the cities named,
and they have been selected as fairly representative of the whole
field. Civil engineers have made extended studies in connection with
this question in a great number of cities, for it bears upon one of the
most important lines of public works. It is absolutely essential to
the health and business prosperity of every city that the water-supply
should be abundant, safe, and adapted to the industrial and commercial
pursuits of its population. It is imperative, therefore, that the
division of the daily supply should be carefully analyzed. For this
purpose the water-supply of a city may be, and frequently is, divided
into four parts:

    (1) That used for domestic purposes;
    (2) That used for commercial and industrial purposes;
    (3) That used for public purposes;
    (4) That part of the supply which is wasted.

1. That portion of the supply consumed for domestic purposes includes
not only the water used in private residences, but in those branches
of consumption which may be considered of a household character found
in hotels, clubs, stores, markets, laundries, and stables, or for
any other residential service. As might be expected, this branch of
consumption varies largely from one city to another. The results
of one of the most interesting and suggestive studies ever made in
connection with this subject are given by Mr. Dexter Brackett, M. Am.
Soc. C. E., in the Transactions of the American Society of Civil
Engineers for 1895. In Boston the purely domestic consumption varied
in different houses and apartments from 59 gallons per head per day
in costly apartments down to 16.6 gallons per head per day in the
poorest class of apartment. In Brookline, one of the finest suburbs of
Boston, the quantity was 44.3 gallons per day. In some other cities
of Massachusetts, as Newton, Fall River, and Worcester, this class of
consumption varied from 6.6 gallons to 26.5 gallons per day, the latter
quantity being found at Newton in some of the best residences, and the
former at houses also in Newton having but one faucet each. In Yonkers,
N. Y., where the system was metered, the amount was 21.4 gallons per
head of population per day, while in portions of London, England, it
varied from 18.6 to 25.5 gallons per head per day. The average of these
figures gives a result of 18.2 gallons per head per day, which, in
round numbers, may be put at 20 gallons.

2. It is obvious that the rate of consumption for commercial and
industrial purposes in any city must vary far more than that for
domestic purposes, for the reason that some cities may be essentially
residential in character while others may be essentially manufacturing.
At the same time, it is to be remembered that many manufacturing
establishments may have their own water-supply. The city of Fall River,
Mass., is eminently a manufacturing city, yet Mr. Brackett found that
the manufacturing demand on the public water-supply amounted to 2
gallons only per inhabitant per day, as the manufacturers draw the
most of their supply from the river, but that where the manufacturers
depend upon the public supply for all their water the amount rises to
a value between 20 and 30 gallons per inhabitant. In Boston in 1892
the water consumed for all manufacturing and industrial purposes,
including railroads, gas-works, elevators, breweries, etc., amounted
to 9.24 gallons per head of population per day, while in Yonkers in
1897 the total consumption for commercial purposes was 27.4 gallons per
head per day. In the city of New York, as nearly as can be estimated,
the consumption for commercial purposes is probably not far from 25
gallons per inhabitant per day. Reviewing all these results, it may
be stated that the water consumption for commercial and industrial
purposes will generally range from 10 to 30 gallons per inhabitant per
day.

3. The consumption of water for public purposes is a smaller amount
than either of the two preceding. It covers such uses as public
buildings, schools, street-sprinkling, sewer-flushing, fountains,
fires, and other miscellaneous objects, more or less similar to those
just named. The total use of this character was 3.75 gallons per
inhabitant per day for Boston in 1892, and 5.57 gallons per inhabitant
per day for Fall River in 1899. A few other cities give the following
results: Minneapolis in 1897, 5 gallons; Indianapolis, 3 gallons;
Rochester, N. Y., 3 gallons; Newton, Mass., 4 gallons; Madison, Wis.,
10 gallons. In Paris it is estimated that not far from 2.5 gallons per
head of population per day are used. It is probable, therefore, that an
amount of 5 gallons per day per inhabitant will cover this particular
line of consumption.

4. A substantial portion of the water-supply of every city fails to
serve any useful purpose, for the reason that it runs to waste either
by intention or by neglect. The sources of this waste are defective
plumbing, including leaky faucets and cocks; deliberate omission to
close faucets and cocks, constituting wilful waste; defective or broken
mains, including leaky joints; and waste to prevent freezing.

=149. Waste of Public Water.=—All these wastes except the last are
inexcusable. There is no difficulty in detecting defective plumbing,
and its existence is generally known to the householder; but if the
wasted water is not measured and paid for, it is far too frequently
considered more economical to continue the waste than to pay for
the plumber’s services. In a multitude of cases cocks are left open
indefinitely for all sorts of insignificant reasons; in closets,
under the erroneous impression that the continuous running of the
stream will materially aid in a more effective cleansing of soil-
and sewer-pipes, failing completely to appreciate that a far more
powerful stream is required for that purpose; sometimes in sinks, for
refrigerating purposes, and in many other inexcusably wrong ways.
These sources of wilful waste lead to large losses and constitute
one of the most unsatisfactory phases of administration of a public
water system. Such losses result in a vicious waste of public money.
The amount of water flowing from leaky joints and from leaks in pipes
and mains is necessarily indeterminate because it escapes without
evidence at the surface except in rare cases. In every instance where
examinations have been made and a careful record kept of the amount
of water supplied to a city, it has been found that the aggregate of
the measured amounts consumed fail nearly to equal the total supply.
There are probable errors both in the measurement of the quantities
supplied and in the quantities consumed, but the large discrepancy
cannot be accounted for in this manner. In many cases consumed water
has even been carefully measured by meters, as at Yonkers, New York,
Newton, Milton, and Fall River, Mass., Madison, Wis., and at other
places, but yet the discrepancy appears to be nearly as wide as ever.
Again, in 1893 observations were carefully made on the consumption of
the water received by the Mystic supply of the Boston system at _all_
hours of the twenty-four. Obviously between 1 and 4 A.M. the useful
consumption should be nearly nothing, but, on the contrary, it was
found to be nearly 60 per cent of the average hourly consumption for
the entire twenty-four hours. The waste at Buffalo, N. Y., in 1894 was
estimated at 70 per cent of the total supply. Similar observations
in other places have given practically the same results. It has also
been found that, in a number of instances, where old watercourses have
been completely obliterated by considerable depths of filling required
by the adopted grades of city streets and lots, and excavations for
buildings have subsequently been opened practically the full volume of
the former streams are flowing along the original but filled channel.
This result has been observed under a practically impervious paved
city surface. It is difficult to imagine the source of such a supply
except from defective pipe systems or sewers. A flow of a least 100,000
gallons per day from a broken pipe which found its way into a sewer has
also been discovered without surface evidence. These and many other
results of experience conclusively demonstrate that much water flows
to waste unobserved from leaky joints and defective or broken pipes.

Inasmuch as cast-iron water-pipes are produced in lengths which net 12
feet as laid, there will be at least 440 joints per mile. Furthermore,
as leaky joints and broken pipes are as likely to occur at one place
as another, it seems reasonable to estimate leakage through them as
proportionate to the length of the pipe-line in a system; and that
conventional law is frequently assumed. New pipe-lines have sometimes
shown a leakage of 500 to 1200 gallons per mile of line per day. Civil
engineers have sometimes specified the maximum permissible leakage of
a new pipe-line at 60 to 80 gallons per mile of line per day for each
inch in diameter of pipe, thus permitting 600 to 800 gallons to escape
from a 10-inch pipe. In 1888 the late Mr. Chas. B. Brush reported a
leakage of about 6400 gallons per mile per day from a practically new
24-inch cast-iron main, 11 miles long, of the Hackensack Water Company,
the pressure being 110 pounds per square inch. Tests of water-pipes in
German and Dutch cities have been reported as showing less waste than
300 gallons per mile per day, but such low results, unless for very low
pressures and short lines, may reasonably be doubted. Obviously losses
of this character will probably increase with the age of the pipe. By
a very ingenious procedure based upon his own experience, Mr. Emil
Kuichling of Rochester, N. Y., reaches the conclusion that a reasonable
allowance for the waste from leaky joints and defective pipes is 2500
to 3000 gallons per mile of cast-iron pipe-line per day. If, as is
frequently the case, the population per mile of pipe ranges from 300 to
1000, the preceding allowance amounts to 3 to 10 gallons per head of
population per day. The loss or waste due to running cocks or faucets
to prevent freezing cannot be estimated with sufficient accuracy to
receive a definite valuation, but it must be considered an element of
the total item of waste.

=150. Analysis of Reasonable Daily Supply per Head of Population.=—It
has repeatedly been found that the losses or wastes set forth in the
preceding statements amount apparently to quantities varying from 30 to
50 per cent of the total supply; or, to put it a little differently,
the water unaccounted for in even the best systems now constructed
apparently may reach one third to one half of the total supply. This
is an exceedingly wasteful and unbusinesslike showing. It is probable
that the statement is, to some extent at least, an exaggeration. It
is practically certain that either the amount supplied or the amounts
consumed, or both, are never measured with the greatest accuracy, and
that the errors are such as generally swell the apparent quantity
wasted. After making judicious use of the data thus afforded by
experience, it is probable that the following tabular statement given
by Messrs. Turneaure and Russell represents limits within which should
be found the daily average supply of water in a well-constructed and
well-administered system.

    +---------------------------+--------------------------------+
    |                           |    Gallons per Head per Day.   |
    |            Use.           +----------+----------+----------+
    |                           | Minimum. | Average. | Maximum. |
    +---------------------------+----------+----------+----------+
    | Domestic                  |    15    |    25    |    40    |
    | Industrial and commercial |     5    |    20    |    35    |
    | Public                    |     3    |     5    |    10    |
    | Waste                     |    15    |    25    |    30    |
    +---------------------------+----------+----------+----------+
    |    Total                  |    38    |    75    |   115    |
    +---------------------------+----------+----------+----------+

The values given in the preceding table are reasonable and sufficient
to supply the legitimate needs of any community, but, as will be shown
in the succeeding table, there are cities in this country whose average
consumption is more than twice the maximum rate given above.

=151. Actual Daily Consumption in Cities of the United States.=—The
following table exhibits the average daily consumption of water
throughout the entire year for the cities given, as determined for the
years indicated in the table.

The city of Buffalo shows a daily consumption of 271 gallons per
inhabitant, and Allegheny, Pa., 247 gallons per inhabitant. There are a
considerable number showing an average daily consumption per inhabitant
of 160 gallons or more. All such high averages exhibit extravagant use
of water, or otherwise inefficient administration of the water-supply.
The reduction of such high rates of consumption is one of the most
difficult problems confronting the administration of public works. The
use of the meter has proved most efficient in preventing wastes or
other extravagant consumption, as in that case every consumer pays a
prescribed rate for the amount which he takes.

TABLE I.

    -------------------+-----------+----------+-------+-----------
                       |           |          |       |Consumption
                       |           |          |  Per  | per
                       |Population.|Population|Cent of| Inhabitant
                       |           | per Tap. | Taps  | Daily,
                       |           |          |Metered| Gallons.
    -------------------+-----------+----------+-------+-----------
                       |   1890.   |   1890.  | 1890. |   1890.
    -------------------+-----------+----------+-------+-----------
    New York           | 1,515,301 |   13.9   |  20.2 |     79
    Chicago            | 1,099,850 |    7.1   |   2.5 |    140
    Philadelphia       | 1,046,964 |    6.1   |   0.3 |    132
    Brooklyn           |   838,547 |    8.7   |   2.5 |     72
    St. Louis          |   451,770 |   11.8   |   8.2 |     72
    Boston             |   448,477 |    6.6   |   5.0 |     80
    Cincinnati         |   305,891 |    8.5   |   4.1 |    112
    San Francisco      |   298,997 |    9.9   |  41.4 |     61
    Cleveland          |   270,055 |    8.7   |   5.8 |    103
    Buffalo            |   255,664 |    6.3   |   0.2 |    186
    New Orleans        |   242,039 |   54.0   |   0.4 |     37
    Washington         |   230,392 |    6.5   |   0.3 |    158
    Montreal           |   216,000 |    5.3   |   1.7 |     67
    Detroit            |   205,876 |    5.1   |   2.1 |    161
    Milwaukee          |   204,468 |   11.1   |  31.9 |    110
    Toronto            |   181,000 |    4.0   |   4.1 |    100
    Minneapolis        |   164,738 |   16.5   |   6.3 |     75
    Louisville         |   161,129 |   11.9   |   5.9 |     74
    Rochester          |   133,896 |    5.4   |  11.4 |     66
    St. Paul           |   133,156 |   12.7   |   4.2 |     60
    Providence         |   132,146 |    9.4   |  62.4 |     48
    Indianapolis       |   105,436 |   35.6   |   7.6 |     71
    Allegheny          |   105,287 |    7.0   |   0   |    238
    Columbus           |    88,150 |   11.5   |   6.4 |     78
    Worcester          |    84,655 |    8.9   |  89.4 |     59
    Toledo             |    81,434 |   18.6   |   9.4 |     72
    Lowell             |    77,696 |    9.2   |  22.9 |     66
    Nashville          |    76,168 |   14.9   |   0.8 |    146
    Fall River         |    74,398 |   14.9   |  74.6 |     29
    Atlanta            |    65,533 |   20.0   |  89.6 |     36
    Memphis            |    64,495 |   11.9   |   3.7 |    124
    Quebec             |    63,000 |   10.4   |   0   |    160
    Dayton, O.         |    61,220 |   20.0   |   3.8 |     47
    Camden, N. J.      |    58,313 |  . . .   | . . . |    131
    Des Moines, Ia.    |    50,093 |   20.0   |  60.0 |     55
    Ottawa, Ont.       |    44,000 |    4.2   |   0   |    130
    Yonkers, N. Y.     |    32,033 |   12.0   |  82.4 |     68
    Newton, Mass.      |    24,379 |    5.5   |  67.4 |     40
    Madison, Wis.      |    13,426 |   11.0   |  31.0 |     40
    Albany, N. Y.      |    98,000 |  . . .   |   0.4 |    162
    New Bedford, Mass. |    55,000 |  . . .   | . . . |     99
    Springfield, Mass. |    49,299 |  . . .   | . . . |     87
    Holyoke, Mass.     |    40,000 |  . . .   | . . . |     77
    -------------------+-----------+----------+-------+-----------
    -------------------+-------+-----------+-----------
                       |       |Consumption|Consumption
                       |  Per  | per       | per
                       |Cent of| Inhabitant| Inhabitant
                       | Taps  | Daily,    | Daily,
                       |Metered| Gallons.  |Gallons.
    -------------------+-------+-----------+-----------
                       | 1895. |   1895.   |   1900.
    -------------------+-------+-----------+-----------
    New York           | 27.0  |    100    |    115
    Chicago            |  2.8  |    139    |    190
    Philadelphia       |  0.74 |    162    |    229
    Brooklyn           |  1.9  |     89    |  . . .
    St. Louis          |  7.4  |     98    |    111
    Boston             |  5.2  |    100    |    143
    Cincinnati         |  6.5  |     35    |    121
    San Francisco      | 28.0  |     63    |     73
    Cleveland          |  4.5  |    142    |    175
    Buffalo            |  0.85 |    271    |    262
    New Orleans        | . . . |     35    |     48
    Washington         |  1.5  |    200    |    174
    Montreal           |  1.6  |     83    |  . . .
    Detroit            |  8.2  |    152    |    156
    Milwaukee          | 51.0  |    101    |     84
    Toronto            |  3.7  |    100    |
    Minneapolis        | 16.0  |     88    |     93
    Louisville         |  6.6  |     97    |  . . .
    Rochester          | 18.0  |     71    |     83
    St. Paul           |  1.7  |     60    |     51
    Providence         | 74.0  |     57    |     54
    Indianapolis       |  7.1  |     74    |     79
    Allegheny          |  7.1  |    247    |  . . .
    Columbus           |  9.3  |    127    |    183
    Worcester          | 90.0  |     66    |     67
    Toledo             | 35.0  |     70    |     59
    Lowell             | 33.0  |     82    |     83
    Nashville          | 24.0  |    139    |    140
    Fall River         | 82.0  |     35    |     35
    Atlanta            | 99.0  |     42    |     61
    Memphis            |  4.6  |    100    |     98
    Quebec             |  0    |    170    |  . . .
    Dayton, O.         | 24.0  |     50    |     62
    Camden, N. J.      |  0    |    200    |    185
    Des Moines, Ia.    | 42.6  |     43    |     48
    Ottawa, Ont.       |  0    |     0     |  . . .
    Yonkers, N. Y.     | 99.8  |    100    |     76
    Newton, Mass.      | 77.3  |     65    |     62
    Madison, Wis.      | 61.0  |     52    |     44
    Albany, N. Y.      | 12.3  |   . . .   |    192
    New Bedford, Mass. | 15.4  |   . . .   |    101
    Springfield, Mass. | 31.9  |   . . .   |     88
    Holyoke, Mass.     | 5.82  |   . . .   | [4]103
    -------------------+-------+-----------+------------

[4] Estimated.

=152. Actual Daily Consumption in Foreign Cities.=—It has been for
a long time a well recognized fact that the daily use of water in
American municipalities is far greater per inhabitant than in European
cities. It is difficult to explain the marked difference, but it is
probably due in large part to the more extravagant general habits of
the American people. Examinations in a number of cases have shown that
the actual domestic use of water, at least in some of the American
cities, is not very different from that found in corresponding foreign
cities. Table II exhibits the consumption of water in European cities,
as compiled from various sources and given by Turneaure and Russell.

TABLE II.

    ---------------------------------------+-------------+-----------
                                           |             |Consumption
                                           |  Estimated  | per Capita
                     City.                 | Population. |   Daily,
                                           |             | Gallons.
    ---------------------------------------+-------------+-----------
    England, 1896-97:[5]                   |             |
      London                               |  5,700,000  |    42
      Manchester                           |    849,093  |    40
      Liverpool                            |    790,000  |    34
      Birmingham                           |    680,140  |    28
      Bradford                             |    436,260  |    31
      Leeds                                |    420,000  |    43
      Sheffield                            |    415,000  |    21
      Nottingham                           |    272,781  |    24
      Brighton                             |    165,000  |    43
      Plymouth                             |     98,575  |    59
    Germany, 1890 (Lueger):                |             |
      Berlin                               |  1,427,200  |    18
      Breslau                              |    330,000  |    20
      Cologne                              |    281,700  |    34
      Dresden                              |    276,500  |    21
      Düsseldorf                           |    144,600  |    25
      Stuttgart                            |    139,800  |    26
      Dortmund                             |     89,700  |    78
      Wiesbaden                            |     62,000  |    20
    France, 1892 (Bechmann):               |             |
      Paris                                |  2,500,000  |    53
      Marseilles                           |    406,919  |   202
      Lyons                                |    401,930  |    31
      Bordeaux                             |    252,654  |    58
      Toulouse                             |    148,220  |    26
      Nantes                               |    125,000  |    13
      Rouen                                |    107,000  |    32
      Brest                                |     70,778  |     3
      Grenoble                             |     60,855  |   264
    Other countries, 1892-96 (Bechmann):   |             |
      Naples                               |    481,500  |    53
      Rome                                 |    437,419  |   264
      Florence                             |    192,000  |    21
      Venice                               |    130,000  |    11
      Zurich                               |     80,000  |    60
      Geneva                               |     70,000  |    61
      Amsterdam                            |    515,000  |    20
      Rotterdam                            |    240,000  |    53
      Brussels                             |    489,500  |    20
      Vienna                               |  1,365,000  |    20
      St. Petersburg                       |    960,000  |    40
      Bombay                               |    810,000  |    61
      Sidney                               |    423,600  |    38
      Buenos Ayres                         |    680,000  |    34
    ---------------------------------------+-------------+-----------

[5] Compiled, except the figures for London, by Hazen. _Engineering
News_, 1899, XLI. p. 111.

These foreign averages, with three exceptions, represent reasonable
quantities of water used, and they have been confirmed as reasonable by
many special investigations made in this country.


=153. Variations in Rate of Daily Consumption.=—The preceding
observations are all based upon an average total consumption found by
dividing the total annual consumption by the number of days in the
year. This is obviously sufficient in a determination of the total
supply needed, but it is not sufficient in those matters which involve
a rate of supply during the different hours of the day, or the amount
of the supply for the summer months as compared with those of the
winter. As a general rule the greatest supply will be required during
the hot summer months when lawn- and street-sprinkling is most active.
It appears from observations made in a considerable number of the
large cities of the United States that the maximum monthly average
consumption may run from about 110 to nearly 140 per cent of the
monthly average throughout the year. As an approximate value only, it
may be assumed for ordinary purposes that the maximum monthly demand
will be 125 per cent of the average.

The daily rate taken throughout the year is considerably more variable
than the monthly. There are days in some portions of the year when
consumption by hotels and industrial activities is at a minimum. On the
other hand, there are other days when those activities are at a maximum
and the total draft will be correspondingly high. Experience has
shown that the maximum total draft may vary from about 115 to nearly
200 per cent of the average. It is permissible, therefore, to take
approximately for general purposes the maximum total daily consumption
as 150 per cent of the average. Manifestly any total consumption will
have an hourly rate which may vary greatly from the early morning
hours, when the draft should be almost nothing, to the forenoon hours
on certain days of the week, when the draft is a maximum. These
variations have frequently been investigated, and it has been shown
that the maximum rate per hour of a maximum day may sometimes rise
higher than 300 per cent of the average hourly rate for the year. These
considerations obviously attain their greatest importance in connection
with the capacity of the plant, either power or gravity, from which the
city directly draws its supply. The hourly capacity of the pumps or
steam-plant furnishing the supply need not necessarily be equal to the
maximum, since storage-reservoirs may be and usually are used; but the
capacity of the pipe system leading from such storage-reservoirs must
be equal to the maximum hourly rate required.


=154. Supply of Fire-streams.=—The draft on a water-supply for
fire-extinguishing purposes may have an important influence upon
the hourly rate of consumption. These observations are particularly
pertinent in connection with the water-supply of small cities where the
draft of fire-engines may be considered a large percentage of the total
hourly consumption. It is obviously impossible to assign precisely the
number of fire-streams which may be required simultaneously in a city
having a given population, but experiences of a considerable number of
civil engineers furnish reasonable bases on which such estimates may be
made. Table III exhibits such estimates as made by the civil engineers
indicated. It is given by Mr. Emil Kuichling in the Transactions of the
American Society of Civil Engineers for December, 1897. Probably no
more reasonable estimate can be now presented.

TABLE III.

    TABLE EXHIBITING ESTIMATED NUMBER OF FIRE-STREAMS REQUIRED
     SIMULTANEOUSLY IN AMERICAN CITIES OF VARIOUS MAGNITUDES.

    ---------------+-------------------------------------------------
                   |  Number of Fire-streams Required Simultaneously.
     Population of +-----------+-----------+-----------+-------------
      Community.   |     1     |     2     |     3     |     4
                   | Freeman.  |  Shedd.   | Fanning.  | Kuichling.
    ---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------------
          1,000    |   2 to  3 |     ..    |     ..    |     3
          4,000    |     ..    |     ..    |      7    |     6
          5,000    |   4 to  8 |      5    |     ..    |     6
         10,000    |   6 to 12 |      7    |     10    |     9
         20,000    |   8 to 15 |     10    |     ..    |    12
         40,000    |  12 to 18 |     14    |     ..    |    18
         50,000    |     ..    |     ..    |     14    |    20
         60,000    |  15 to 22 |     17    |     ..    |    22
        100,000    |  20 to 30 |     22    |     18    |    23
        150,000    |     ..    |     ..    |     25    |    34
        180,000    |     ..    |     30    |     ..    |    38
        200,000    |  30 to 50 |     ..    |     ..    |    40
        250,000    |     ..    |     ..    |     ..    |    44
        300,000    |     ..    |     ..    |     ..    |    48
    ---------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-------------

The discharge of each fire-stream will of course vary with its diameter
and the pressure at the fire-engine, but as an average it is reasonable
to assume that each stream will discharge 250 gallons per minute. The
quantity of water required, therefore, to supply the estimated number
of streams given in Table III is found by simply multiplying the number
of those streams by 250, to ascertain the total number of gallons
consumed per minute. If _x_ is the number of thousand inhabitants in
any city, and if _y_ represents the required number of streams, then
Mr. Kuichling deduces the following formulæ for _y_ by the use of the
preceding tables, i.e., these formulæ express the results given in the
preceding table as nearly as simple forms of formulæ permit.
                                           ___
                          { _y_ min. = 1.7√_x_ + 0.033_x_,}
                          {                               }
    For Freeman’s data:   {            _x_                }  (1)
                          { _y_ max. = --- + 10.          }
                          {             5                 }
                                        ____         ___
    For Shedd’s data:       _y_      = √5_x_ = 2.24 √_x_.    (2)

                                       _x_
    For Fanning’s data:     _y_      = --- + 9.              (3)
                                       10
                                            ___
    For the author’s data:  _y_      = 2.8 √_x_.             (4)

While for the average ordinary consumption of water, expressed in
gallons per head and day, _q_, Mr. Coffin’s formula, as given in his
paper previously cited, may be taken

    _q_ = 40_x_⁰˙¹⁴.                     (5)

By combining equation (5) with equation (4), remembering that the
maximum rate of consumption is usually about 1.5 times the average,
the total draft in gallons per minute upon the discharging system at
the time of a conflagration will become as follows:

                   ___     3   40 × 1000
    _Q_ = 250(2.8 √_x_) + ---- ---------- _x_¹˙¹⁴
                           2     1440

           (    ___    _x_¹˙¹⁴)
      = 250(2.8√_x_ + --------)           (6)
           (            6     )

This maximum rate of consumption during a conflagration does not affect
the total supply of a large city like New York, Boston, or Chicago, but
it may become of relatively great importance in a small city or town.
In a large city this draft may and frequently does tax the capacity of
a small district of the discharging system. In designing such systems,
therefore, even for large cities, it is necessary to insure all
districts against a small local supply when a large one may pressingly
be needed.




CHAPTER XV.


=155. Waste of Water, Particularly in the City of New York.=—The
quantity of water involved in designing a water-supply for cities and
towns is much larger than that which is actually needed. The experience
of civil engineers in many cities, both in this country and in Europe,
shows conclusively that the portion of water actually wasted or running
away without serving any purpose will usually run from 30 to 50 per
cent of the total amount brought to the distributing system. In the
city of New York there is strong reason to believe that the wastage
is not less than two thirds of the total quantity supplied. It is
frequently assumed that both the quantities supplied and the quantities
uselessly wasted in New York are larger than in other places. As a
matter of fact those quantities are actually smaller than in some other
large cities. While the supply per inhabitant in New York City is much
larger than should be required, the use of water by its citizens is not
extravagant when gauged by the criterion of use in other large cities.
This question was most carefully and exhaustively investigated in 1899
and the early part of 1900 by Mr. John R. Freeman of Boston, acting for
the comptroller of the city of New York.

The usual wastes of a water-supply system may be distributed under six
principal heads. First, leaky house-plumbing; second, and “possibly
first in order of magnitude,” leaky service-pipes connecting the
house pipe system with street-mains; third, leaving water-cocks open
unnecessarily; fourth, leaky joints in street-mains or pipes; fifth,
possibly pervious beds and banks of distributing-reservoirs; sixth,
stealing or “unlawful diversion” of water through surreptitious
connections.

The sixth item is probably an extremely small one in New York, although
instances of that kind of waste have been found. It is an old wastage
known as far back in time as the ancient Roman water-supply. The second
and third items probably constitute the bulk of the wastage in this
city.

=156. Division of Daily Consumption in the City of New York.=—In the
course of his search for the various sources of consumption, Mr.
Freeman concluded from his examinations and from the use of the various
means placed at his command for measuring the daily consumption between
December 2nd and December 5th, 1899, and December 8th and December
15th, 1899, that the average daily consumption could be divided as
follows:

                                      Gallons per Inhabitant
                                            per Day.

    Probable average amount really used      40
    Assumed incurable waste                  10}
    Curable waste, probably                  65} 75
                                            ----
        Daily uniform rate of delivery by
            Croton Aqueduct                 115

In his investigations Mr. Freeman had the elevation of water in the
Central Park reservoir carefully observed every six minutes throughout
the twenty-four hours. At the same time the uniform flow through the
new Croton Aqueduct was known as accurately as the flow through such
a conduit can be gauged at the present time. Knowing, therefore, the
concurrent variation of volume in the Central Park reservoir supplied
by the new Croton Aqueduct and the rate of flow in that aqueduct, the
consumption of water per twenty-four hours would be known with the same
degree of accuracy with which the flow in the aqueduct is measured. It
was found by these means that the actual consumption between the hours
of 2 and 4 A.M. was at the rate of 94 gallons per inhabitant per day,
although the actual use at that time was as near zero as it is possible
to approach during the whole twenty-four hours. Nearly all of that rate
of consumption represents waste.

Summing up the whole matter in the light of his investigations, Mr.
Freeman made the following as his nearest estimate to the actual
consumption of the daily supply of water of New York City:

                                                     Gallons per
                                                      Inhabitant
    ACTUAL USE:                                        per Day.
      Domestic (average)                                12  - 20
      Manufacturing and commercial                      20  - 30
      City buildings, etc.                               2  -  4
      Fires, street flushing and sprinkling              0.4 - 0.7
                                                       -----------
         Total                                          34  - 55

    INCURABLE WASTE (probabilities):
      Leaks in mains                                             1 - 2
      Leaks in old and abandoned service-pipes                   1 - 2
      Poor plumbing, all taps metered and closely inspected      2 - 3
      Careless and wilful wastes                                 1 - 2
      Under-registry of meters                                   1 - 1
                                                               -------
        Total incurable waste and under-registry                 6 -10
                                                              ========
        Minimum use and waste                                   40 -65

    NEEDLESS WASTE:
      Leaks in street-mains (a guess)                           15- 10
      Leaks in service-pipes between houses and street-mains    15- 10
               (a guess)
      Defective plumbing (a guess)                              25- 15
      Careless and wilful opening of cocks (a guess)            17- 14
      To prevent freezing in winter and for cooling in summer    3 - 1
                                                              --------
        Total needless waste                                    75- 50
                                                              ========
        Total consumption                                      115-115

=157. Daily Domestic Consumption.=—The quantity assigned in the
preceding statement to domestic use is confirmed by the abundant
experience in other cities where services are carefully metered, as in
Fall River, Lawrence, and Worcester, Mass., and in Woonsocket, R. I.,
where measurements by meters show that the domestic consumption has
varied from 11.2 to 16.3 gallons per inhabitant per day. Furthermore,
annual reports of the former Department of Public Works and the
present Department of Water-supply for the City of New York show that
during the years 1890 to 1898 such meters as have been used in the
territory supplied by the Croton and the Bronx aqueducts indicate a
daily consumption varying from 13.8 to 24.2 gallons per inhabitant
per day. The same character of confirmatory evidence can be applied
to the quantities assigned to manufacturing and commercial uses, city
buildings and fires, street flushing and sprinkling.

=158. Incurable and Curable Wastes.=—The items composing incurable
waste, unfortunately, cannot be so definitely treated. It is perfectly
well known, however, among civil engineers, that a large amount of
leakage takes place from corporation cocks, which are those inserted
in the street-mains to form the connection between the latter and the
house service-pipes. Again, many of these service-pipes are abandoned
and insufficiently closed, or not closed at all, leaving constantly
running streams whose continuous subsurface discharges escape detection
and frequently find their way into sewers. Water-pipes which have been
laid many years frequently become so deeply corroded as to afford
many leaks and sometimes cracks. Doubtless there are many portions of
a great distributing system, like that in New York City, which need
replacing and afford many large leaks, but undiscoverable from the
surface. Many lead joints of street-mains also become leaky with age,
while others are leaky when first laid in spite of inspection during
construction. Just how much these items of waste would aggregate it
is impossible accurately to state, but from careful observations made
in other places 5 to 10 gallons per day per head of population seems
reasonable. A three-year-old cast-iron fire-protection pipe 5.57 miles
long and mainly 16 inches in diameter, under an average pressure of 114
pounds per square inch, was tested in Providence in 1900 and showed a
leakage at lead joints only of 446 gallons per mile per twenty-four
hours, which was equivalent to .22 gallon per foot of lead joint per
twenty-four hours. Further tests in 1900 of seven lines of new pipe
laid by the Metropolitan Board of Boston, and tested under pressures
varying from 50 to 150 pounds per square inch by Mr. F. P. Stearns,
chief engineer, and Mr. Dexter Brackett, engineer of Distribution
Department, and having an aggregate length of 51.4 miles with diameters
ranging from 16 to 48 inches, gave an average leakage per lineal foot
of pipe in gallons per twenty-four hours ranging from .6 to 3.7 gallons
(average 2.47 gallons), equivalent to an average leakage of 3 gallons
per twenty-four hours per lineal foot of lead joint. The possible rates
of leakage from street-mains are to be applied to a total length of
pipe-lines of 833 miles for the boroughs of Manhattan and the Bronx.
The borough of Brooklyn has somewhat over 600 miles of street-mains,
but they are not to be considered in connection with the Croton and
Bronx water-supply.

All these considerations either confirm or make reasonable the
estimates of the various items of actual use and waste set forth by Mr.
Freeman.

=159. Needless and Incurable Waste in City of New York.=—Concisely
summing up his conclusions, it may be stated that in the year 1899 the
average consumption per inhabitant of the boroughs of Manhattan and the
Bronx was 115 gallons; of these 115 gallons the needless average waste
may be 65 gallons, while the incurable or necessary waste may probably
be taken at 10 gallons per inhabitant per day. It is further probable
that the total underground leakage in New York City is to be placed
somewhere between 20 to 35 gallons per inhabitant per day.

=160. Increase in Population.=—The total volume of daily supply to
any community is determined by the population; but the population is
as a whole constantly increasing. It becomes necessary, therefore, to
estimate the capacity of a water-supply system in view of the future
population of the city to be supplied. No definite rule can be set
as to the future period for which the capacity of any desired system
is to be estimated. It may be stated that no shorter period of time
than probably ten years should be considered, indeed it is frequently
prudent to provide for a period of not less than twenty years, and it
may sometimes be necessary or advisable to consider a possible source
of supply for even fifty years. Provision must be made not only for the
present population, but for the increase during those periods of time,
or at least for the possible development that may be needed.

The increase in population of cities will obviously vary for different
locations with the character of the occupations followed and with
the development of such important factors of industrial life as
railroad connections, facilities for marine commerce, the capacity for
development of the surrounding country, and other influences which aid
in the increase of commerce and industrial activity and the growth
of population. It has been observed, as a matter of experience, that
large cities generally reach a point where their subsequent increase of
population is represented by a practically constant percentage, the
value of that percentage depending upon local considerations. In 1893,
when it was desired to estimate the future population of London for as
much as forty years, it was found that the increase for the ten years
from 1881 to 1891 was 18.2 per cent, with an average of about 20 per
cent for several previous decades. It could, therefore, be reasonably
estimated for the city of London that its population at the end of any
ten-year period would be 18.2 per cent greater than its population
at the beginning of that period. In Appendix 1 of the report of the
Massachusetts State Board of Health upon the Metropolitan water-supply
for the city of Boston made in 1895, the increases for the two ten-year
periods 1870-1880 and 1880-1890 were 6 per cent and 9.6 per cent
respectively for the city proper, but for the population within a
ten-mile radius from the centre of the city they were 28.7 per cent
and 33.7 per cent respectively. The corresponding percentages for the
cities of New York, Philadelphia, and Chicago for the same periods are
as shown in the following tabular statement:

    ------------+-----------------------------+------------------------
                |       Population.           |Percentages of Increase.
    ------------+---------+---------+---------+---------+--------------
                |  1870.  |  1880.  |  1890.  |1870-80. | 1880-90.
    ------------+---------+---------+---------+---------+--------------
    New York    |1,626,119|2,131,051|2,821,802|   31    | 32
    Philadelphia|  726,247|  921,458|1,162,577|   27    | 26
    Chicago     |  310,996|  550,618|1,075,158|   77    | 95[6]
    ------------+---------+---------+---------+---------+--------------

[6] Includes added territory.

Obviously every estimate of this kind must be made upon the merits
of the case under consideration. The probable increase of population
for any particular city is sometimes estimated by considering the
circumstances of growth of some other city of practically the
same size, and if possible with the same commercial industries or
residential environment, or making suitable allowances for variations
in these respects. Since it is imperative to secure as accurate
estimates as practicable, both methods or other suitable methods should
be employed, in order that the results may be confirmed or modified by
comparison. In every case the supply system should be designed to meet
reasonable estimated requirements for the longest practicable future
period, preferably not less than twenty years.

=161. Sources of Public Water-supplies.=—One of the most important
features of a proposed water-supply is its source, since not only
the potable qualities are largely affected by it, but frequently
the amount also. The two general classes into which potable waters
are divided in respect to their sources are surface-waters and
ground-waters. Surface-waters include rain-water collected as it falls,
water from rivers or smaller streams, and water from natural lakes;
they are collected in reservoirs and lakes or impounding reservoirs.
Ground-waters are those collected from springs, from ordinary or
shallow wells, from deep or artesian wells, and from horizontal
galleries, like those sometimes constructed near and parallel to
subsurface streams or in subsurface bodies of water, affording
opportunity for filtration from the latter through sand or other open
materials to them.

The quality of water will obviously be affected by the kind of material
through which it percolates or flows. Surface-waters, flowing over
the surface of the ground or percolating but a short distance below
the surface, naturally have contact with vegetable matter, unless
they are collected in a country where the soil is sandy and where the
vegetation is scarce. If such waters flow through swamps or over beds
of peat or other similar vegetable mould or soil, they may become so
impregnated with organic matter or so deeply colored by it that they
are not available for potable purposes. Ground-waters, on the other
hand, possess the advantage of having flowed through comparatively
great depths of sand or other earthy material essentially free of
organic matter. They may, however, in some locations, carry prejudicial
amounts of objectionable salts in solution, rendering them unfit for
use. As a rule, ground-waters are apt to be of better quality than
surface-waters, but they do not generally stand storage in reservoirs
as well as surface potable waters. It is advisable to store them in
covered reservoirs from which the light is excluded, rather than in
open reservoirs. They are sometimes impregnated with salts of iron to
such an extent as to make it necessary to resort to suitable processes
for their removal, and they are also occasionally found so hard as to
require the employment of methods of softening them.

Both sources of supply are much used in the United States. Table IV
shows the percentages of the various classes of supplies as found in
this country during the year 1897; the total number of supplies having
been at that time nearly 4000.


TABLE IV.

                   WATER-SUPPLIES OF THE UNITED STATES.

                     Source.                      Per Cent of Total.

                    {Rivers                                25
    Surface-waters: {Lakes                                  7
                    {Impounding reservoirs                  6
                    {Combinations                           .5
                                                          ----- 38.5

                   {Shallow wells                          26
                   {Artesian wells                         10
    Ground-waters: {Spring                                 15
                   {Galleries and tunnels                   1
                   {Combinations                            2
                                                          ----- 54

    Surface- and  {Rivers and ground-waters                 6
   ground-waters: {Lakes and ground-waters                  1
                  {Impounding reservoirs and ground-waters   .5
                                                           ----  7.5
                                                             -------
                    Total                                      100.0

It will be observed that a little more than one half of the supplies
are from ground-waters. The practice in connection with European public
water-supplies is different in that a considerably larger percentage of
the total is taken from ground-waters.

The original source of essentially all the water available for public
water-supplies is the rainfall. It becomes of the greatest necessity,
therefore, to secure all possible information regarding rainfall
wherever it may be necessary to construct a public water-supply. Civil
engineers and other observers have for many years maintained continuous
records of rainfall observations at various points throughout the
country, but it is within only a comparatively short time that the
number of those points has been large. Through the extension of the
work of the Weather Bureau, points of rainfall observation are now
scattered quite generally throughout all States of the Union. The
oldest observations are naturally found in connection with stations
located in the Eastern States, where the rainfall is more uniformly
distributed than in many other portions of the country. Obviously
rainfall records become of the greatest importance in those localities
like the semiarid regions of the far West where long periods of no rain
occur.

=162. Rain-gauges and their Records.=—The instrument used for the
collection of rain in order to determine the amount falling in a given
time is the rain-gauge, which may be fitted with such appliances as to
give a continuous record of the rate of rainfall. It has been found
that the location of the rain-gauge has a very important influence
upon the amount of rain which it collects. It should be placed where
wind currents around high structures in its vicinity cannot affect its
record. The top of a large flat-roofed building is a good location in
a city, although the elevation above the surface of the ground, as is
well known, affects the quantity of water collected by the gauge. The
collection will be greater at a low elevation than at a high one, in
consequence of the greater wind currents at the higher point, it being
well known that less rain will be collected where there is the most
wind, other things being equal.

[Illustration: Ordinary Rain-gauge.]

=163. Elements of Annual and Monthly Rainfall.=—In consequence of
the great variations in the rate of rainfall, not only for different
portions of the country, but at different times during the same
storm, it becomes necessary to determine various quantities such as
the maximum, minimum, and mean annual rainfall, the actual monthly
rainfall for different months of the year, and the maximum and minimum
monthly rainfall for as long a period as possible. The minimum monthly
rainfall and the minimum annual rainfall are of special importance in
connection with public water-supply and water-power questions, since
those minima will, in connection with the area of a given watershed,
determine the greatest amount of water which can be made available for
use. In entering upon the consideration of such questions, therefore,
civil engineers must inform themselves with the greatest detail as
to the characteristics of the monthly and the annual rainfall of the
locality in which their works are to be located.

[Illustration: MONTHLY VARIATIONS IN RAINFALL.

FIG. 1.]

TABLE V.

         GENERAL RAINFALL STATISTICS FOR THE UNITED STATES.

    ----------------------------+---------+---------+---------
                                |         | Per Cent|
                                |         |    of   | Per Cent
                                |  Mean   |  Summer |  Driest
              Station.          | Yearly  |   and   | Year to
                                |Rainfall.|  Autumn |   Mean
                                |         |  Rain to|   Year.
                                |         |   Mean  |
                                |         | Yearly. |
    ----------------------------+---------+---------+---------
    North Atlantic:             |         |         |
        Boston                  |   45.4  |    50   |    60
        New York                |   44.7  |    52   |    62
        Philadelphia            |   42.3  |    52   |    70
        Washington              |   42.9  |    51   |    69
    South Atlantic:             |         |         |
        Wilmington              |   53.7  |    61   |    75
        Charleston              |   49.1  |    61   |    48
        Augusta                 |   48.0  |    50   |    81
        Jacksonville            |   54.1  |    65   |    74
        Key West                |   38.2  |    70   |    54
    Gulf and Lower Mississippi: |         |         |
        Montgomery              |   52.5  |    42   |    76
        Mobile                  |   62.6  |    51   |    68
        New Orleans             |   60.3  |    52   |    64
        Galveston               |   47.7  |    58   |    50
        Nashville               |   50.2  |    46   |    67
    Ohio Valley:                |         |         |
        Pittsburg               |   36.6  |    53   |    70
        Cincinnati              |   42.1  |    50   |    60
        Indianapolis            |   42.2  |    51   |    59
        Cairo                   |   42.6  |    47   |    62
        Louisville              |   47.2  |    48   |    74
    Lake Region:                |         |         |
        Detroit                 |   32.5  |    56   |    65
        Cleveland               |   36.6  |    54   |    71
        Duluth                  |   30.7  |    63   |    65
    Upper Mississippi Valley:   |         |         |
        St. Louis               |   40.8  |    52   |    55
        Chicago                 |   34.0  |    54   |    66
        Milwaukee               |   31.0  |    55   |    66
        Madison                 |   33.2  |    58   |    39
    The Plains:                 |         |         |
        Omaha                   |   31.4  |    63   |    57
        North Platte            |   18.1  |    61   |    56
        Denver                  |   14.3  |    48   |    59
        Cheyenne                |   12.7  |    55   |    39
    The Plateau:                |         |         |
        Tucson                  |   11.7  |    65   |    44
        Santa Fé                |   14.6  |    69   |    53
        Salt Lake City          |   18.8  |    39   |    55
        Walla Walla             |   15.4  |    38   |    46
    Pacific Coast:              |         |         |
        Astoria                 |   77.0  |    33   |    64
        Portland                |   46.2  |    31   |    67
        Sacramento              |   19.9  |    16   |    42
        San Francisco           |   23.4  |    17   |    51
        Los Angeles             |   17.2  |    15   |    33
        San Diego               |    9.7  |    18   |    30
    ----------------------------+---------+---------+---------
                                |         |         |
                                |         |         |
                                | Per Cent| Per Cent| Number
              Station.          |   Two   |  Three  |   of
                                |  Driest |  Driest |  Years’
                                |  Years. |  Years. | Record.
                                |         |         |
                                |         |         |
    ----------------------------+---------+---------+---------
    North Atlantic:             |         |         |
        Boston                  |    70   |    80   |    79
        New York                |    77   |    80   |    61
        Philadelphia            |    75   |    80   |    72
        Washington              |    71   |    74   |    45
    South Atlantic:             |         |         |
        Wilmington              |    80   |    81   |    26
        Charleston              |    55   |    62   |    89
        Augusta                 |    88   |    87   |    27
        Jacksonville            |    77   |    83   |    27
        Key West                |    61   |    73   |    49
    Gulf and Lower Mississippi: |         |         |
        Montgomery              |    80   |    83   |    24
        Mobile                  |    75   |    78   |    26
        New Orleans             |    75   |    77   |    26
        Galveston               |    65   |    72   |    26
        Nashville               |    73   |    83   |    32
    Ohio Valley:                |         |         |
        Pittsburg               |    78   |    85   |    54
        Cincinnati              |    72   |    71   |    62
        Indianapolis            |    76   |    82   |    27
        Cairo                   |    75   |    81   |    25
        Louisville              |    81   |    85   |    25
    Lake Region:                |         |         |
        Detroit                 |    72   |    79   |    46
        Cleveland               |    74   |    81   |    41
        Duluth                  |    81   |    88   |    26
    Upper Mississippi Valley:   |         |         |
        St. Louis               |    65   |    75   |    60
        Chicago                 |    80   |    86   |    30
        Milwaukee               |    74   |    73   |    53
        Madison                 |    58   |    68   |    28
    The Plains:                 |         |         |
        Omaha                   |    63   |    70   |    27
        North Platte            |    67   |    72   |    22
        Denver                  |    71   |    77   |    27
        Cheyenne                |    62   |    75   |    27
    The Plateau:                |         |         |
        Tucson                  |    79   |    80   |    19
        Santa Fé                |    63   |    66   |    37
        Salt Lake City          |    64   |    74   |    29
        Walla Walla             |    81   |    86   |    27
    Pacific Coast:              |         |         |
        Astoria                 |    68   |    77   |    34
        Portland                |    76   |    79   |    27
        Sacramento              |    67   |    84   |    47
        San Francisco           |    73   |    78   |    47
        Los Angeles             |    48   |    59   |    24
        San Diego               |    54   |    61   |    47
    ----------------------------+---------+---------+---------

The diagram Fig. 1 and Table V are constructed from data given in
the bulletins of the Weather Bureau and exhibit some of the general
features of the rainfall for different points throughout this country.
The heavy lines of the diagram show the average monthly precipitation
at the points indicated, for periods of a considerable number of
years, as shown in the table. It will be observed that the rainfall is
comparatively uniform in the North Atlantic States but quite variable
on the Pacific coast, as well as in the Mississippi and Missouri
valleys and west of those valleys.

=164. Hourly or Less Rates of Rainfall.=—Although not often of great
importance in connection with public water-supply systems, it is
sometimes necessary to possess data regarding maximum hourly (or less)
rates of precipitation in connection with sewer or drainage work.
The earlier records give exaggerated reports of maximum rates of
rainfall, although that rate varies rapidly with the time. Throughout
a rain-storm the rate of precipitation is constantly varying and
the maximum rate seldom if ever extends over a period equal to a
half-hour; usually it lasts but a few minutes only. In this country
an average rate of 1 inch per hour, extending throughout one hour,
is phenomenal, although that rare amount is sometimes exceeded. A
maximum rate of about 4 inches per hour, lasting 15 to 30 minutes, is,
roughly speaking, about as high as any precipitation of which we have
reliable records. The waste ways or other provisions for the discharge
of surplus or flood-waters of the Metropolitan Water-supply of Boston
are designed to afford relief for a total precipitation of 6 inches
in twenty-four hours. It is safe to state that an excess of that
accommodation will probably never be required.

=165. Extent of Heavy Rain-storms.=—In all engineering questions
necessitating the consideration of these great rain-storms it is
necessary to remember that their extent is frequently much greater
than the areas of watersheds usually contemplated in connection with
water-supply work. The late Mr. James B. Francis found in the great
storm of October, 1869, which had its maximum intensity in Connecticut,
that the area over which 6 inches or more of rain fell exceeded 24,000
square miles, and that the area over which a depth of 10 inches or more
fell was 519 miles. Again, in the New England storm of February, 1886,
6 inches or more of rain fell over an area of at least 3000 square
miles. Storm records show that as much as 8 or 10 inches in depth have
fallen over areas ranging from 1800 to 500 square miles, respectively,
in a single storm.

=166. Provision for Low Rainfall Years.=—The capacity of any public
water-supply must evidently be sufficient to meet not only the general
exigencies of the year of lowest rainfall, but also the conditions
resulting from the driest periods of that year. It is customary among
civil engineers to consider months as the smaller units of a dry year.
It is necessary, therefore, to examine not only the annual rainfalls
but the monthly rates of precipitation during critical years, i.e.,
usually during dry years.

It is impossible to determine absolutely the year of least rainfall
which may be expected, but evidently the longer the period over which
observations have extended the nearer that end will be attained. It
is sometimes assumed that the lowest annual rainfall likely to be
expected in a long period of years is 80 per cent of the average annual
rainfall for the same period. Or, it is sometimes assumed that the
average rainfall for the lowest two or three consecutive years will be
80 per cent of the average for the entire period, and that the year
of minimum rainfall may be expected to yield two thirds of the annual
average precipitation. Such features will necessarily vary with the
location of the district considered. Conclusions which may be true for
the New England or northern Atlantic States probably will not hold for
the south Atlantic and Gulf States. Data for such conclusions must
be obtained from the rainfall of the locality considered. Table VI
exhibits the comparative monthly rainfall which J. T. Fanning suggests
may be used approximately for the average Atlantic coast districts.

TABLE VI.

    +-----------+-----------+------------+-----------+
    |           |   Mean    |            | Probable  |
    |           | Monthly   | Respective | Depth in  |
    |           | Rainfall, | Ratios.    | Inches of |
    |           |  Inches.  |            |  Actual   |
    |           |           |            | Rainfall. |
    +-----------+-----------+------------+-----------+
    | January   |     4     ×    1.65    =    6.6    |
    | February  |     4     ×    1.50    =    6.0    |
    | March     |     4     ×    1.65    =    6.6    |
    | April     |     4     ×    1.45    =    5.8    |
    | May       |     4     ×     .85    =    3.4    |
    | June      |     4     ×     .75    =    3.0    |
    | July      |     4     ×     .35    =    1.4    |
    | August    |     4     ×     .25    =    1.0    |
    | September |     4     ×     .30    =    1.2    |
    | October   |     4     ×     .45    =    1.8    |
    | November  |     4     ×    1.20    =    4.8    |
    | December  |     4     ×    1.60    =    6.4    |
    +-----------+------------------------------------+

If the average monthly rainfall throughout the year were one inch, the
values of the ratios would show the actual monthly precipitation. In
general the table would be used by dividing the total yearly rainfall
by 12, and then multiplying that monthly average by the proper ratio
taken from the table opposite the month required. Such tables should
only be used for approximate purposes and when actual rainfall records
are not available for the district considered.

=167. Available Portion of Rainfall or Run-off of Watersheds.=—If the
public water-supply is to be drawn from a stream where the desired
rainfall records exist, it is necessary to know what portion of the
rainfall, either in the driest or in other years, may be available.
This is one of the departments of the hydraulics of streams for which
much data yet remain to be secured. The watersheds or areas drained
by some streams, like the Sudbury River of the Boston, and the Croton
of the New York water-supply, have, however, been studied with
sufficient care to give reliable data. The amount of water flowing in
a stream from any watershed for a given period, as a year, is called
the annual “run-off” of the watershed, and it is usually expressed
as a certain percentage of the total rainfall on the area drained.
For certain purposes it is sometimes more convenient to express the
run-off from the watershed as the number of cubic feet of water per
second per square mile of area. Table VII, taken from Turneaure and
Russell, exhibits run-off data for a considerable number of streams in
connection with both average and minimum rainfalls.

TABLE VII.

                     STATISTICS OF THE FLOW OF STREAMS.

    -----------------+---------+-------+----------------+-----------------
                     |   Area  |       | Average Yearly.|Year of Minimum
          Stream.    | Drained,|       |                |      Flow.
                     |  Square | Years.+-----+-----+----+-----+------+----
                     |  Miles. |       |Rain,|Flow,|Per |Rain,|Flow,|Per
                     |         |       |Inch.|Inch.|Cent|Inch.|Inch.|Cent
    -----------------+---------+-------+-----+-----+----+-----+-----+----
    Sudbury          |    75.2 |1875-97|45.77|22.22|48.6|32.78|11.19|34.1
    Cochituate       |    18.87|1863-96|47.08|20.33|43.2|31.20| 9.76|31.3
    Mystic           |    26.9 |1878-96|43.79|19.96|45.6|31.22| 9.32|29.8
    Connecticut      |10,234   |1871-85|44.69|25.25|56.5|40.02|18.25|45.6
    Croton           |   338   |1870-94|48.38|24.57|50.8|38.52|14.54|37.8
    Upper Hudson     | 4,500   |1888-96|39.70|23.36|59.0|33.49|17.46|52.2
    Genesee          | 1,060   |1894-96|39.82|12.95|32.5|31.00| 6.67|21.5
    Passaic          |   822   |1877-93|47.08|25.44|54.0|35.64|15.23|42.7
    Upper Mississippi| 3,265   |1885-99|26.57|4.90 |18.4|22.86| 1.62| 7.1
    =================+=========+=======+=====+=====+====+=====+=====+====
                     |         |       |   Average for  |Average for June
                     |  Area   |       |December to May.| to  November.
          Stream.    | Drained,|       |                |
                     | Square  | Years.+-----+-----+----+-----+-----+----
                     | Miles.  |       |Rain,|Flow,|Per |Rain,|Flow,| Per
                     |         |       |Inch.|Inch.|Cent|Inch.|Inch.|Cent
    -----------------+---------+-------+-----+-----+----+-----+-----+----
    Sudbury          |    75.2 |1875-97|22.98|17.52|76.0|22.61| 4.70|20.8
    Cochituate       |    18.87|1863-96|22.97|14.87|64.7|24.10| 5.46|22.7
    Mystic           |    26.9 |1878-96|22.11|15.12|68.4|21.66| 4.84|22.4
    Connecticut      |10,234   |1871-85|20.13|17.95|89.1|24.56| 7.30|29.7
    Croton           |   338   |1870-94|23.39|17.81|76.1|24.99| 6.76|27.0
    Upper Hudson     | 4,500   |1888-96|18.20|16.23|89.0|21.50| 7.13|33.0
    Genesee          | 1,060   |1894-96|19.58|10.20|52.2|20.24| 2.75|13.6
    Passaic          |   822   |1877-93|22.47|18.22|81.1|24.39| 7.19|29.5
    -----------------+---------+-------+-----+-----+----+-----+-----+----

The information to be drawn from this table is sufficient to give clear
and general relations between the recorded precipitation and run-off.
The percentage of run-off is seen to vary quite widely, but as a rule
it is materially less for the year of minimum flow than for the average
year. That feature of the table is an expression of the general law,
other things being equal, that the smaller the precipitation the less
will be the percentage of run-off. A number of influences act to
produce that result. During a year of great precipitation the earth is
more nearly saturated the greater part of the time, and hence when rain
falls less of it will percolate into the ground and more of it will run
off. Again, if the ground is absolutely dry, a certain amount of rain
would have to fall before any run-off would take place. The area and
shape of a watershed will also affect to some extent the flow of the
stream which drains it. A larger run-off would reasonably be expected
from a long narrow watershed than from one more nearly circular in
outline. The greater the massing of the watershed, so to speak, the
more opportunity there is for the water to be held by the ground and
the less would be the run-off.

TABLE VIII.

    AVERAGE YIELD OF SUDBURY WATERSHED, 1875-1899, INCLUSIVE,
                         VARIOUSLY EXPRESSED.

                  (Area of watershed, 75.2 square miles.)
    ---------+--------------------+-------------------------------
             |  Per Square Mile.  |           Rainfall.
      Month. +--------------------+----------+----------+---------
             |Cubic Feet |Million |Collected,|Per Cent  |  Total,
             |per Second.|Gallons |Inches.   |Collected.|  Inches.
             |           |per Day.|          |          |
    ---------+-----------+--------+----------+----------+---------
    January  |      1.937|   1.252|     2.233|      51.6|  4.33
    February |      2.904|   1.877|     3.050|      71.7|  4.26
    March    |      4.489|   2.901|     5.175|     117.4|  4.41
    April    |      3.124|   2.019|     3.485|     107.5|  3.24
    May      |      1.680|   1.086|     1.936|      58.1|  3.33
    June     |       .735|    .475|      .821|      28.0|  2.93
    July     |       .305|    .197|      .352|       9.3|  3.77
    August   |       .478|    .309|      .551|      13.3|  4.16
    September|       .376|    .243|      .419|      13.0|  3.23
    October  |       .829|    .536|      .956|      21.9|  4.37
    November |      1.474|    .953|     1.645|      39.0|  4.22
    December |      1.612|   1.042|     1.859|      51.9|  3.58
             +-----------+--------+----------+----------+--------
    Year     |      1.655|   1.070|    22.482|      49.1| 45.83
    ---------+-----------+--------+----------+----------+--------

=168. Run-off of Sudbury Watershed.=—Table VIII has been given by
Mr. Charles W. Sherman, as representing the average yield of the
Sudbury watershed for the period 1875 to 1899, inclusive, expressed in
several different ways. The average rainfall was 45.83 inches, and the
percentage which represents the run-off is 49.1 per cent of the total.
The average monthly run-off varies from .305 cubic foot (for July) to
4.489 cubic feet (for March) per second per square mile. As a general
rule it may be stated that the average run-off from the drainage areas
of New England streams amounts very closely to 1,000,000 gallons per
square mile per day. The area of the Sudbury watershed is 75.2 square
miles, with 6.5 per cent of that total area occupied by the surface of
lakes or reservoirs. As will presently be seen, the amount of exposed
water surface in any watershed has an appreciable influence upon its
run-off.

=169. Run-off of Croton Watershed.=—The total area of the Croton
watershed, from which New York City draws its supply, i.e., the area
up-stream from the new Croton Dam, is 360.4 square miles, of which 16.1
square miles, or 4.47 per cent, of its total area is water surface. Mr.
John R. Freeman found in the investigations covered by his report to
the comptroller of the city of New York in 1900 that the average annual
rainfall on that area for the thirty-two years beginning 1868 and
ending 1899 was 48.07 inches, and that the average run-off for the same
period was 47.7 per cent of the total average rainfall, equivalent to a
depth of 22.93 inches.

[Illustration: Aqueducts near Jerome Park Reservoir, New York City.]

Table IX gives the main elements of the rainfall and run-off for the
Croton watershed during the thirty-two year period, for the averages
just given.

TABLE IX.

    RAINFALL ON CROTON WATERSHED IN TOTAL INCHES—1868-1898.
    NATURAL FLOW OF CROTON RIVER AT OLD CROTON DAM,
                IN EQUIVALENT INCHES.
    PERCENTAGE OF RUN-OFF TO RAINFALL FOR EACH YEAR.

    -----------+---------+---------+-----------
       Year.   |  Total  |  Total  |
               |Rainfall.| Run-off.| Per Cent.
    -----------+---------+---------+-----------
        1868   |  50.33  |  33.33  |   66.22
        1869   |  48.36  |  23.61  |   48.82
        1870   |  44.63  |  19.20  |   43.02
        1871   |  48.94  |  19.46  |   39.76
        1872   |  40.74  |  16.92  |   41.53
        1873   |  43.87  |  25.02  |   57.03
        1874   |  42.37  |  25.10  |   59.24
        1875   |  43.66  |  24.77  |   56.73
        1876   |  40.68  |  21.09  |   51.84
        1877   |  48.23  |  20.22  |   41.92
        1878   |  55.70  |  27.17  |   48.78
        1879   |  47.04  |  19.65  |   41.77
        1880   |  36.92  |  12.63  |   34.21
        1881   |  46.69  |  19.25  |   41.23
        1882   |  52.35  |  24.28  |   46.38
        1883   |  42.70  |  13.33  |   31.22
        1884   |  51.28  |  24.08  |   46.96
        1885   |  43.67  |  17.71  |   40.55
        1886   |  47.74  |  20.10  |   42.10
        1887   |  57.29  |  26.61  |   46.45
        1888   |  60.69  |  35.27  |   58.12
        1889   |  55.70  |  31.39  |   56.36
        1890   |  54.05  |  25.95  |   48.01
        1891   |  47.20  |  23.48  |   49.75
        1892   |  44.28  |  17.68  |   39.93
        1893   |  54.87  |  29.05  |   52.94
        1894   |  47.33  |  20.56  |   43.44
        1895   |  40.58  |  15.95  |   39.31
        1896   |  45.85  |  23.26  |   50.73
        1897   |  53.12  |  25.59  |   48.17
        1898   |  57.40  |  29.72  |   51.77
        1899   |  44.67  |  22.28  |   49.88
    Average for|  48.07  |  22.93  |   47.70
     32 years. |         |         |
    -----------+---------+---------+-----------

The table shows that the least annual rainfall was 36.92 inches for
1880, and that the run-off represented a depth of 12.63 inches only, or
34.21 per cent of the total annual precipitation. As a rule the same
feature of a low percentage of run-off will be found belonging to the
years of low rainfall, although there are many irregularities in the
results. On the other hand, the high percentages of run-off are for the
years 1868, 1888, and 1889, and they will generally be found belonging
to years of relatively great precipitation. A low percentage of run-off
will also be lower if the year to which it belongs follows a dry year
or a dry cycle of two or three years. Similarly the high percentages
of run-off will, as a rule, be higher if they follow years of high
precipitation; that is, if they belong to a cycle of relatively great
rainfall.

=170. Evaporation from Reservoirs.=—If it is contemplated to build
reservoirs on a watershed the capacity of which is being estimated
on the basis of either the driest year or the driest two- or three
year cycle, it is necessary to make a deduction from the rainfall
for the evaporation which will take place from the surface of the
proposed reservoir. In order that that deduction may be made as a
proper allowance for added water surface in a drainage area, it is
necessary that the amount of evaporation be determined for the district
considered. The rate of evaporation is dependent upon the area of water
surface, upon the wind, and upon the temperature both of the water and
air above it. Numerous evaporation observations have been made both in
this and other countries, and extensive evaporation tables have been
prepared by the Weather Bureau, from which a reasonable estimate of the
monthly evaporation for all months in the year may be made for almost
any point in the United States. Particularly available observations
have been made by Mr. Desmond Fitzgerald of Boston on the Chestnut
Hill reservoirs of the Boston Water-supply, and by Mr. Emil Kuichling,
engineer of the Rochester Water-works, on the Mount Hope reservoir of
the Rochester supply. Table X exhibits the results of the observations
of both these civil engineers.

[Illustration: Aqueduct Division Wall of Jerome Park Reservoir, New
York City.]

As would be anticipated, the period from May to September, both
inclusive, shows by far the greatest evaporation of the whole year,
while December, January, and February are the months of least
evaporation. The total annual evaporation at Boston was 39.2 inches and
34.54 inches at Rochester.

TABLE X.

                      MEAN MONTHLY EVAPORATIONS.
    ----------------+-------------------------+-------------------------
                    |                         |
                    | Chestnut Hill Reservoir,| Mount Hope Reservoir,
          Month.    |      Boston, Mass.      |   Rochester, N. Y.
                    |                         |
    ----------------+------------+------------+------------+------------
                    |            |  Per Cent  |            |  Per Cent
                    |Evaporation,|  of Yearly |Evaporation,|  of Yearly
                    |  Inches.   |Evaporation.|  Inches.   |Evaporation.
    ----------------+------------+------------+------------+------------
    January         |    0.96    |     2.4    |    0.52    |     1.5
    February        |    1.05    |     2.7    |    0.54    |     1.6
    March           |    1.70    |     4.3    |    1.33    |     3.9
    April           |    2.97    |     7.6    |    2.62    |     7.6
    May             |    4.46    |    11.4    |    3.93    |    11.4
    June            |    5.54    |    14.2    |    4.94    |    14.3
    July            |    5.98    |    15.2    |    5.47    |    15.8
    August          |    5.50    |    14.0    |    5.30    |    15.4
    September       |    4.12    |    10.4    |    4.15    |    12.0
    October         |    3.16    |     8.1    |    3.16    |     9.1
    November        |    2.25    |     5.7    |    1.45    |     4.2
    December        |    1.51    |     3.9    |    1.13    |     3.2
                    +------------+------------+------------+------------
    Total for year  |   39.20    |            |   34.54    |
                    +------------+------------+------------+------------
    Mean temperature|          48°.6          |          47°.8
    ----------------+-------------------------+-------------------------

A reference to data of the Weather Bureau will show that annual
evaporation as high as 100 inches, or even more, may be expected on
the plateaux of Arizona and New Mexico. Other portions of the arid
country in the western part of the United States will indicate annual
evaporations running anywhere from 50 to 90 inches per year, while on
the north Pacific coast it will fall as low as 18 to 40 inches.

=171. Evaporation from the Earth’s Surface.=—Data are lacking for
anything like a reasonably accurate estimate of evaporation from the
earth’s surface. It is well known that the loss of water from that
source is considerable in soils like those of swamps, particularly
when exposed to the warm sun, but no reliable estimate can be obtained
for the exact amount. Nor is this necessary for the usual water-supply
problems, since it is included in the difference between the total
rainfall of any district and the observed run-off in the streams.
Indeed evaporation from reservoirs is similarly included for reservoirs
existing when the run-off observations are made.




CHAPTER XVI.


=172. Application of Fitzgerald’s Results to the Croton Watershed.=—The
evaporation data determined by Messrs. Fitzgerald and Kuichling are
sufficient for all ordinary purposes in the North Atlantic States. In
the discussion of the capacity of the Croton watershed Mr. Fitzgerald’s
results will be taken, as the conditions of the Croton watershed in
respect to temperature and atmosphere are affected by the proximity to
the ocean, and other features of the case make it more nearly like the
Metropolitan drainage area near Boston than the more elevated inland
district near Rochester.

If the monthly amounts of evaporation be taken from the preceding
table, and if it further be observed that a volume of water 1
square mile in area and 1 inch thick contains 17,377,536 gallons,
the following table (Table XI) of amounts of evaporation from the
reservoirs in the Croton watershed, including the new Croton Lake, will
result, since the total area of water surface of all these reservoirs
is 16.1 square miles.

TABLE XI.

    Jan.  0.96 × 16.1 × 17,377,536 = 268,600,000 gallons.
    Feb.  1.05 ×   ”  ×      ”     =    293,800,000    ”
    Mar.  1.70 ×   ”  ×      ”     =    475,700,000    ”
    April 2.97 ×   ”  ×      ”     =    831,000,000    ”
    May   4.46 ×   ”  ×      ”     =  1,247,900,000    ”
    June  5.54 ×   ”  ×      ”     =  1,550,100,000    ”
    July  5.98 ×   ”  ×      ”     =  1,673,200,000    ”
    Aug.  5.50 ×   ”  ×      ”     =  1,538,900,000    ”
    Sept. 4.12 ×   ”  ×      ”     =  1,152,800,000    ”
    Oct.  3.16 ×   ”  ×      ”     =    884,200,000    ”
    Nov.  2.25 ×   ”  ×      ”     =    629,600,000    ”
    Dec.  1.51 ×   ”  ×      ”     =    422,500,000    ”
         -----                       --------------
         39.20              Total  = 10,968,300,000    ”

It will be seen from this table that the total annual evaporation from
all the reservoir surfaces of the Croton watershed, as it will exist
when the new Croton Lake is completed, will be nearly 11,000,000,000
gallons, enough to supply the boroughs of Bronx and Manhattan at the
present rate of consumption for about forty days.

=173. The Capacity of the Croton Watershed.=—The use of the preceding
figures and numbers can be well illustrated by considering the capacity
of the Croton watershed in its relations to the present water needs of
the boroughs of Bronx and Manhattan which that watershed is designed
to supply. The total area of the Croton watershed is 360.4 square
miles, of which 16.1 square miles, as has already been observed, is
water surface. As a matter of fact the run-off observations from that
watershed have been maintained or computed for the thirty-two-year
period from 1868 to 1899, inclusive, covering the evaporation from the
reservoirs and lake surfaces as they have existed during that period.
The later observations, therefore, include the effects of evaporation
from the more lately constructed reservoirs, but none of these data
cover evaporation from the entire surface of the new Croton Lake, whose
excess over that of the old reservoir is nearly one third of the total
water surface of the entire shed. As a margin of safety and for the
purpose of simplification, separate allowance will be made for the
evaporation from all the reservoir and lake surfaces of the entire
watershed as it will exist on the completion of the new Croton Lake, as
a deduction from the run-off. The preceding table (Table XI) exhibits
those deductions for evaporation as they will be made in the next table.

In Table IX the year 1880 yields the lowest run-off of the entire
thirty-two-year period. The total precipitation was 36.92 inches, and
only 34.21 per cent of it was available as run-off. The first column in
Table XII gives the amount of monthly rainfall for the entire year, the
sum of which aggregates 36.92 inches. Each of these monthly quantities
multiplied by .3421 will give the amount of rainfall available for
run-off, and the latter quantity multiplied by the number of square
miles in the watershed (360.4) will show the total depth of available
water concentrated upon a single square mile. If the latter quantity be
multiplied by 17,378,000, the total number of gallons available for the
entire month will result, from which must be subtracted the evaporation
for the same month. Carrying out these operations for each month in the
year, the monthly available quantities for water-supply will be found,
as shown in the last column.

TABLE XII.

    (Jan.  3.43 × .3421 = 1.173) × 360.4 × 17,378,000 -   268,600,000 =  7,077,700,000
    (Feb.  3.40 ×   ”   = 1.163) ×   ”   ×     ”      -   293,800,000 =  6,989,900,000
    (Mar.  3.90 ×   ”   = 1.334) ×   ”   ×     ”      -   475,700,000 =  7,879,000,000
    (April 3.57 ×   ”   = 1.221) ×   ”   ×     ”      -   831,000,000 =  6,816,000,000
    (May   1.04 ×   ”   =  .356) ×   ”   ×     ”      - 1,247,900,000 =    982,000,000
    (June  1.40 ×   ”   =  .479) ×   ”   ×     ”      - 1,550,100,000 =  1,449,800,000
    (July  5.86 ×   ”   = 2.005) ×   ”   ×     ”      - 1,673,200,000 = 10,890,000,000
    (Aug.  4.16 ×   ”   = 1.423) ×   ”   ×     ”      - 1,538,900,000 =  7,373,100,000
    (Sept. 2.42 ×   ”   =  .828) ×   ”   ×     ”      - 1,152,800,000 =  4,032,900,000
    (Oct.  2.83 ×   ”   =  .968) ×   ”   ×     ”      -   884,200,000 =  5,178,500,000
    (Nov.  2.32 ×   ”   =  .794) ×   ”   ×     ”      -   629,600,000 =  4,343,100,000
    (Dec.  2.59 ×   ”   =  .886) ×   ”   ×     ”      -   422,500,000 =  5,126,300,000
          -----
          36.92

The sum of the twelve monthly available quantities will give the total
number of gallons per year applicable to meeting the water demands of
the boroughs of Bronx and Manhattan.

=174. Necessary Storage for New York Supply to Compensate for
Deficiency.=—At the present time the average daily consumption per
inhabitant of those two boroughs is 115 gallons, and if the total
population be taken at 2,200,000, the total daily consumption will
be 2,200,000 × 115 = 253,000,000 gallons. If the latter quantity be
multiplied by 30.5, the latter being taken as the average number of
days in the month throughout the year, the average monthly draft of
water for the two boroughs in question will be 7,716,500,000 gallons.
The subtraction of the latter quantity from the monthly results in the
preceding table will exhibit a deficiency which must be met by storage
or a surplus available for storage. Table XIII exhibits the twelve
monthly differences of that character.

TABLE XIII.

     7,077,700,000 — 7,716,500,000 = -   638,800,000
     6,989,900,000 —       ”       = -   726,600,000
     7,879,000,000 —       ”       =                   +  162,500,000
     6,816,000,000 —       ”       = -   900,500,000
       982,000,000 —       ”       = - 6,734,500,000
     1,449,800,000 —       ”       = - 6,266,700,000
    10,890,000,000 —       ”       =                   +3,173,500,000
     7,373,100,000 —       ”       = -   343,400,000
     4,032,900,000 —       ”       = - 3,683,600,000
     5,178,500,000 —       ”       = - 2,538,000,000
     4,343,100,000 —       ”       = - 3,373,400,000
     5,126,300,000 —       ”       = - 2,590,200,000
                                      ---------------  ---------------
                                      -27,795,700,000   +3,336,000,000
                                      + 3,336,000,000
                                      ---------------
                                      -24,459,700,000

It is seen from this table that the total monthly deficiencies
aggregate 27,795,700,000 gallons and that there are only two months in
which the run-off exceeds the consumption, the surplus for those two
months being only 3,336,000,000 gallons. The total deficiency for the
year is therefore 24,459,700,000 gallons. Dividing the latter quantity
by the average daily draft of 253,000,000 gallons, there will result
a period of 97 days, or more than one quarter of a year, during which
the minimum annual rainfall would fail to supply any water to the city
at all. These results show that in case of a low rainfall year, like
that of 1880, the precipitation upon the Croton watershed would supply
sufficient water for the boroughs of Bronx and Manhattan at the present
rate of consumption for three fourths of the year only. A distressingly
serious water famine would result unless the year were begun by
sufficient available storage in the reservoirs of the basin at least
equal to 24,459,700,000 gallons. Should such a low rainfall year or
one nearly approaching it be one of a two- or three-year low rainfall
cycle, such a reserve storage would be impossible and the resulting
conditions would be most serious for the city. If an average year, for
which the total rainfall would be about 48 inches preceded such a year
of low rainfall, the conditions would be less serious. The figures
would stand as follows:

    Total run-off =
      17,377,536 × 360.4 × 22.93 - 17,377,536 × 16.1 × 39.2
                                       = 132,640,000,000 gallons.

    Total annual consumption           =  92,345,000,000    ”
                                         ---------------
    Available for storage              =  40,295,000,000    ”
    Deficiency                         =  24,459,700,000    ”
                                         ---------------
    Surplus                            =  15,835,300,000    ”

The average year would, therefore, yield enough run-off water if stored
to more than make up the deficiency of the least rainfall year by
nearly 16,000,000,000 gallons. In order to secure the desired volume it
would therefore be necessary to have storage capacity at least equal
to 24,459,700,000 gallons; indeed, in order to meet all the exigencies
of a public water-supply it would be necessary to have far more than
that amount. As a matter of fact there are in the Croton watershed
seven artificial reservoirs with a total storage capacity of nearly
41,000,000,000 gallons, besides a number of small ponds in addition
to the new Croton Lake which with water surface at the masonry crest
of the dam has a total additional storage capacity of 23,700,000,000
gallons. The storage capacity of the new Croton Lake may be increased
by the use of flash-boards 4 feet high placed along its crest, so
that with its water surface at grade 200 its total capacity will be
increased to 26,500,000,000 gallons. After the new Croton reservoir is
in use the total storage capacity of all the reservoirs and ponds in
the Croton watershed will be raised to 70,245,000,000 gallons, which
can be further augmented by the Jerome Park reservoir when completed by
an amount equal to 1,900,000,000 gallons. This is equivalent, at the
present rate of consumption, to a storage supply for 285 days for the
boroughs of Manhattan and the Bronx.

=175. No Exact Rule for Storage Capacity.=—This question of the
amount of storage capacity to be provided in connection with public
water-supplies is one which cannot be reduced to an exact rule.
Obviously if the continuous flow afforded from any source is always
greater per day than any draft that can ever be made upon it, no
storage-reservoirs at all would be needed, although they might be
necessary for the purpose of sedimentation. On the other hand, as in
the case of New York City, if the demand upon the supply has reached
its capacity or exceeded it for low rainfall years, it may be necessary
to provide storage capacity sufficient to collect all the run-off of
the watershed. The civil engineer must from his experience and from the
data before him determine what capacity between those limits is to be
secured. When the question of volume or capacity of storage is settled
the mode of distribution of that volume or capacity in reservoirs is
to be determined, and that affects to some extent the potability of
the water. If there is a large area of shallow storage, the vegetable
matter of the soil may affect the water in a number of ways. Again, it
is advisable in this connection to consider certain reservoir effects
as to color and contained organic matter in general.

=176. The Color of Water.=—The potability[7] of water collected from
any watershed is materially affected by its color. Although iron
may produce a brownish tinge, by far the greater amount of color
is produced by dissolved vegetable matter. Repeated examinations
of colored water have shown that discoloration is in many cases at
least a measure of the vegetable matter contained in it. While this
may not indicate that the water is materially unwholesome, it shows
conclusively the existence of conditions which are usually productive
of minute lower forms of vegetation from which both bad taste and odors
are likely to arise.

[7] What is generally known as the “Michigan standard of the purity
of drinking-water,” as specified by the Michigan State Laboratory of
Hygiene, is here given:

     “1. The total residue should not exceed 500 parts per
         million.
     “2. The inorganic residue may constitute the total residue.
     “3. The smaller amount of organic residue the better the
         water.
     “4. The amount of earthy bases should not exceed 200 parts
         per million.
     “5. The amount of sodium chloride should not exceed 20 parts
         per million (i.e., ‘chlorine’ 12.1 parts per million).
     “6. The amount of sulphates should not exceed 100 parts per
         million.
     “7. The organic matter in 1,000,000 parts of the water
         should not reduce more than 8 parts of potassium
         permanganate (i.e., ‘required oxygen’ 2.2 parts per
         million).
     “8. The amount of free ammonia should not exceed 0.05 part
         per million.
     “9. The amount of albuminoid ammonia should not exceed 0.15
         part per million.
    “10. The amount of nitric acid should not exceed 3.5 parts
         per million (i.e., ‘N as nitrate’ .9 part per million).
    “11. The best water contains no nitrous acid, and any water
         which contains this substance in quantity sufficient
         to be estimated should not be regarded as a safe
         drinking-water.
    “12. The water must contain no toxicogenic germs as
         demonstrated by tests upon animals.

“The water must be clear and transparent, free from smell, and without
either alkaline or acid taste, and not above 5 French standard of
hardness.”

This standard is too high to be attained ordinarily in natural waters.


There are two periods in the year of maximum intensity of color, one
occurring in June and the other in November. The former is due to the
abundant drainage of peaty or other excessively vegetable soils from
the spring rains. After June the sun bleaches the water to a material
extent until the autumn, when the dying vegetation imparts more or less
coloring to the water falling upon it. This last agency produces its
maximum effect in the month of November.

There are various arbitrary scales employed by which colors may be
measured and discolored waters compared. Among others, dilute solutions
of platinum and cobalt are used, in which the relative proportions of
those substances are varied so as to resemble closely the colors of the
water. The amount of platinum used is a measure of the color, one unit
of which corresponds to one part of the metal in 10,000 parts of water.
Again, the depth at which a platinum wire 1 mm. (.039 inch) in diameter
and 1 inch long can be seen in the water is also taken as a measure
of the color, the amount of the latter being inversely as the depth.
This method has found extended and satisfactory use in connection with
the Metropolitan Water-supply of Boston, the Cochituate water having a
degree of color represented by .25 to .30, while the Sudbury water has
somewhat more than twice as much. The Cochituate water is practically
colorless.

The origin of the color of water is chiefly the swamps which drain into
the water-supply, or the vegetation remaining upon a new reservoir site
when the surface soil has not been removed before the filling of the
reservoir. The drainage of swamps should not, as a rule, be permitted
to flow into a public water-supply, as it is naturally heavily charged
with vegetable matter and is correspondingly discolored. This matter,
like many others connected with the sanitation of potable public
waters, has been most carefully investigated by the State Board of
Health of Massachusetts in connection with the Boston water-supply.
Its work has shown the strong advisability of diverting the drainage
of large swamps from a public supply as carrying too much vegetable
matter even when highly diluted by clear water conforming to desirable
sanitary standards.

=177. Stripping Reservoir Sites.=—The question of stripping or cleaning
reservoir sites of soil is also one which has been carefully studied
by the Massachusetts State Board of Health. As a consequence large
amounts of money have been expended by the city of Boston in stripping
the soil from reservoir sites to the average depth in some cases of 9
inches for wooded land and 12½ inches for meadow land. This was done
in the case of the Nashua River reservoir having a superficial area of
6.56 square miles at a cost of nearly $2,910,000, or about $700 per
acre. It has been found that the beneficial effect of this stripping
is fully secured if the black loam in which vegetation flourishes is
removed.

[Illustration: Wachusetts Reservoir, showing Stripping of Soil.]

This stripping of soil is indicative of the great care taken to secure
a high quality of water for the city of Boston, but it is not done in
the Croton watershed of the New York supply. It cannot be doubted that
the quality of the Croton supply would have been sensibly enhanced by
a similar treatment of its reservoir sites. Mr. F. B. Stearns, chief
engineer of the Metropolitan Water-supply of Boston, states that in
some cases the effects of filling reservoirs without removing the
soil and vegetable matter have “continued for twenty years or more
without apparent diminution.” On the other hand, water discolored by
vegetable matter becomes bleached to some extent at least by standing
in reservoirs whose sites have been stripped of soil.

=178. Average Depth of Reservoirs should be as Great as Practicable.=—In
the selection of reservoir locations those are preferable where the
average depths will be greatest and where shallow margins are reduced
to a minimum. It may sometimes be necessary to excavate marginal
portions which would otherwise be shallow with a full reservoir.
There should be as little water as possible of a less low-water
depth than 10 or 12 feet, otherwise there may be a tendency to
aquatic vegetable growth. The following table exhibits the areas,
average depths, capacity, and other features of a number of prominent
storage-reservoirs.

    COMPARATIVE TABLE OF AREAS, DEPTHS, AND CAPACITIES OF STORAGE
    RESERVOIRS WITH HEIGHTS AND LENGTHS OF DAMS.

    LEGEND:
        (A) = Area Square Miles.
        (B) = Average Depth, Feet.
        (C) = Length of Dam, Feet.
        (D) = Capacity, Million Gallons.
    ------------------------------+-----+---+--------------+-----+-------
                                  |     |   |Maximum Height|     |
                                  |     |   |    of Dam.   |     |
            Name and Location     |     |   +-------+------+     |
               of Reservoir.      | (A) |(B)| Above | Above| (C) |  (D)
                                  |     |   |Ground.| Rock.|     |
    ------------------------------+-----+---+-------+------+-----+-------
    Swift River, Mass             |36.96| 53|  144  |  ... |2,470|406,000
    Nashua River, Mass            | 6.56| 46|  129  |  158 |1,250| 63,068
    Nira, near Poona, India       | 7.25| 27|  100  |  ... |3,000| 41,143
    Tansa, Bombay, India          | 5.50| 33|  127  |  131 |8,770| 37,500
    Khadakvasla, Poona, India     | 5.50| 32|  100  |  107 |5,080| 36,737
    New Croton, N. Y.             | ....| ..|  157  |  225 |1,270| 32,000
    Elan and Claerwen, Birmingham,|     |   |       |      |     |
      Eng.,  water-works          |     |   |       |      |     |
    (total for six reservoirs)    | 2.34| 43|98-128 |  ... |4,460| 20,838
    All Boston water-works        |     |   |       |      |     |
      reservoirs combined         | 5.82| 14|14-65  |  ... |.....| 15,867
    Vyrnwy, Liverpool, Eng.       | 1.75| ..|  84   |  129 |1,350| 14,560
    Ware River, Mass.             | 1.62| 33|  71   |  ... |  785| 11,190
    Sodom, N. Y.                  | ....| ..|  72   |   89 |  500|  9,500
    Reservoir No. 5, Boston       |     |   |       |      |     |
      water-works                 | 1.91| 19|  65   |   70 |1,865|  7,438
    Titicus, N. Y.                | ....| ..| 105   |  115 |.....|  7,000
    Hobbs Brook, Cambridge        |     |   |       |      |     |
      water-works                 | 1.00| 12|  23   |  ... |.....|  2,500
    Cochituate, Boston water-works| 1.35|  8|  ..   |  ... |.....|  2,160
    Reservoir No. 6, Boston       |     |   |       |      |     |
      water-works                 | 0.29| 25|  52   |  ... |1,500|  1,500
    ------------------------------+-----+---+-------+------+-----+-------

=179. Overturn of Contents of Reservoirs Due to Seasonal Changes of
Temperature.=—It will be noticed that the average depth is less
than about 20 feet in few cases only. If the water is deep, its mean
temperature throughout the year will be lower than if shallow. During
the warmer portion of the year the upper layers of the water are
obviously of a higher temperature than the lower portions, since the
latter receive much less immediate effect from the sun’s rays. As the
upper portions of the water are of higher temperature, they are also
lighter and hence remain at or near the top. For the same reason the
water at the bottom of the reservoir remains there throughout the warm
season and until the cool weather of the autumn begins. The top layers
of water then continue to fall in temperature until it is lower than
that of the water at the bottom, when the surface-water becomes the
heaviest and sinks. It displaces subsurface water lighter than itself,
the latter coming to the surface to be cooled in turn.

This operation produces a complete overturning of the entire reservoir
volume as the late autumn or early winter approaches. It thus brings to
the surface-water which has been lying at the bottom of the reservoir
all summer in contact with what vegetable matter may have been there.
The depleted oxygen of the bottom water is thus replenished with a
corresponding betterment of condition. It is the great sanitary effort
of nature to improve the quality of stored water entrusted to its care,
and it continues until the surface is cooled to a temperature perhaps
lower than that of the greatest density of water.

Another great turn-over in the water of a lake or reservoir covered
with ice during the winter occurs in the spring. When the ice melts,
the resulting water rises a little in temperature until it reaches
possibly its greatest density at 39°.2 Fahr., and then sinks,
displacing subsurface water. This goes on until all the ice is melted
and until all water cooled by it, near the surface, below 39°.2 Fahr.
has been raised to that temperature. The period of summer stagnation
then follows.

=180. The Construction of Reservoirs.=—The natural topography and
sometimes the geology of the locality determines the location of the
reservoir. The first requirement obviously is tightness. If for any
reason whatever, such as leaky banks or bottom, porous subsurface
material, or for any other defect, the water cannot be retained in
the reservoir, it is useless. Some very perplexing questions in this
connection have arisen. Indeed reservoirs have been completed only
to be found incapable of holding their contents. Such results are
evidently not creditable to the engineers who are responsible for them,
and they should be avoided.

[Illustration: YARROW RESERVOIR, LIVERPOOL WATER-SUPPLY]

[Illustration: SAN LEANDRO DAM, SAN FRANCISCO WATER-WORKS]

[Illustration: TITICUS DAM, NEW YORK WATER-SUPPLY]

In order that the bottom of the reservoir may be water-tight it must
be so well supported by firm underlying material that it will not be
injured by the weight of water above it, which in artificial reservoirs
may reach 30 to 100 feet or more in depth. The subsurface material at
the site of any proposed structure of this character must, therefore,
be carefully examined so as to avoid all porous material, crevasses in
rocks, or other open places where water might escape. Objectionable
material may frequently be removed and replaced with that which is
more suitable, and rock crevices and other open places may sometimes
be filled with concrete and made satisfactory. Whatever may be the
conditions existing, the finished bottom of the reservoir should be
placed only on well-compacted, firm, unyielding material.

The character of the reservoir bottom will depend somewhat upon the
cost of suitable material of which to construct it. If a bottom of
natural earth cannot be used, a pavement of stone, brick, or concrete
may be employed from 8 inches to a foot or a foot and a half in
thickness. The reservoir banks must be placed upon carefully prepared
foundations, sometimes with masonry core-walls. They are frequently
composed of clayey and gravelly material mixed in proper proportions
and called puddle, although that term is more generally applied to a
mixture of clay and gravel designed to form a truly impervious wall
in the centre of the reservoir embankment. Some engineers require the
core-wall, as it is called, to be constructed of masonry, with the
earth or gravelly material carried up each side of this wall in layers
6 to 9 inches thick, well moistened and each layer thoroughly rolled
with a grooved roller, or treated in some equivalent manner in order
that the whole mass may not be in strata but essentially continuous
and as nearly impervious as possible. The masonry core-wall should be
founded on bed-rock or its equivalent. Its thickness will depend upon
the height of the embankment. If the latter is not more than 20 or 25
feet high, the core-wall need not be more than 4 to 6 feet thick, but
if the embankment reaches a height of 75 feet or even 100 feet, it must
be made 15 to 20 feet thick, or possibly more, at the base. Its top
should be not less than 4 or 6 feet thick, imbedded in the earth and
carried well above the highest surface of water in the reservoir.

The thickness of the clay puddle-wall employed as the central core
of the reservoir embankment is usually made much thicker than that
of masonry. As a rough rule it may be made twice as thick as the
masonry core at the deepest point and not less than about 6 feet at
the top. The thickness of the puddle core is sometimes varied to meet
the requirements of the natural material in which it is embedded at
different depths.

Frequently, when embankments are under about 20 feet high, the
core-walls may be omitted, excavation having been made at the base of
the embankment down to rock or other impervious material, and if the
entire bank is carried up with well-selected and puddled material.

The interior slopes of reservoir embankments are usually covered with
roughly dressed stone pavement 12 to 18 inches thick, laid upon a
broken stone foundation 8 to 12 inches thick, for a protection against
the wash of waves, the pavement in any case being placed upon the bank
slope after having been thoroughly and firmly compacted. The sloping
and bottom pavements, of whatever material they may be composed, should
be made continuous with each other so as to offer no escape for the
water. In some cases where it has been found difficult to make the
interior surfaces of reservoirs water-tight, asphalt or other similar
water-tight layers have been used with excellent results.

The care necessary to be exercised in the construction of storage or
other reservoirs when earth dams or embankments are used can better be
appreciated when it is realized that almost all such banks, even when
properly provided with masonry or clay-puddle core-walls, are saturated
with water, even on the down-stream side, at least throughout their
lower portions. A board of engineers appointed by the commissioners
of the Croton Aqueduct in the summer of 1901 made a large number
of examinations in the earth embankments in the Croton watershed,
and found that with scarcely an exception those embankments were
saturated throughout the lower portions of their masses, although in
every case a masonry core-wall had been built. The results of those
investigations showed that the water had percolated through the earth
portion of the embankments and even through the core-walls, which had
been carried down to bed-rock. This induced saturation, more or less,
of the material on the down-stream slopes of the embankments. When
material is thus filled with water, unless it is suitably selected, it
is apt to become soft and unstable, so that any superincumbent weight
resting upon it might produce failure. The fact that such embankments
may become saturated with water fixes limits to their heights, since
the surface of saturation in the interior of the bank has generally
a flatter slope than that of the exterior surface. The height of the
embankment therefore should be such that the exterior slope cannot cut
into the saturated material at its foot, at least to any great extent.
From what precedes it is evident that the height of an earth embankment
will depend largely upon the slope of the exterior surface. This slope
is made 1 vertical to 2, 2½, or 3 horizontal. The more gradual slope
is sometimes preferable. It is advisable also to introduce terraces
and to encourage the growth of sod so as to protect the surface from
wash. The inner paved slope may be as steep as 1 vertical to 1½ or 2
horizontal.

[Illustration: BOG BROOK DAM NO. 1.—RESERVOIR 1.]

[Illustration: TITICUS DAM.—RESERVOIR M.]

[Illustration: AMAWALK DAM.—RESERVOIR A.

Earth Dams in Croton Watershed, showing Slopes of Saturation.]

=181. Gate-houses, and Pipe-lines in Embankments.=—It is necessary
to construct the requisite pipe-lines and conduits leading from the
storage-reservoirs to the points of consumption, and sometimes such
lines bring the water to the reservoir. Wherever such pipes-line or
conduits either enter or leave a reservoir gates and valves must be
provided so as properly to control the admission and outflow of the
water. These gate-houses, as they are called, because they contain
the gates or valves and such other appurtenances or details as
are requisite for operation and maintenance, are usually built of
substantial masonry. They are the special outward features of every
reservoir construction, and their architecture should be characteristic
and suitable to the functions which they perform. Where the pipes are
carried through embankments it is necessary to use special precautions
to prevent the water from flowing along their exterior surfaces.
Many reservoirs have been constructed under defective design in this
respect, and their embankments have failed. Frequently small masonry
walls are built around the pipes and imbedded in the bank, so as to
form stops for any initial streams of water that might find their way
along the pipe. In short, every care and resource known to the civil
engineer must be employed in reservoir construction to make its bottom
and its banks proof against leakage and to secure permanence and
stability in every feature.

=182. High Masonry Dams.=—The greatest depths of water impounded in
reservoirs are found usually where it is necessary to construct a high
dam across the course of a river, as at the new Croton dam. In such
cases it is not uncommon to require a dam over 75 to 100 feet high
above the original bed of the river, which is usually constructed of
masonry with foundations carried down to bed-rock in order to secure
suitable stability and prevent flow or leakage beneath the structure.
It is necessary to secure that result not only along the foundation-bed
of the dam, but around its ends, and special care is taken in those
portions of the work.

The new Croton dam is the highest masonry structure of its class yet
built. The crest of its masonry overflow-weir is 149 feet above the
original river-bed, with the extreme top of the masonry work of the
remaining portion of the dam carried 14 feet higher. A depth of earth
and rock excavation of 131 feet below the river-bed was necessary
in order to secure a suitable foundation on bed-rock. The total
maximum height, therefore, of the new Croton dam, from the lowest
foundation-point to the extreme top, is 294 feet, and the depth of
water at the up-stream face of the dam will be 136 feet when the
overflow is just beginning, or 140 feet if 4 feet additional head be
secured by the use of flash-boards. In the prosecution of this class
of work it is necessary not only to reach bed-rock, but to remove all
soft portions of it down to sound hard material, to clean out all
crevices and fissures of sensible size, refilling them with hydraulic
cement mortar or concrete, and to shape the exposed rock surfaces so
as to make them at least approximately normal to the resultant loads
upon them, to secure a complete and as nearly as possible water-tight
bond with the superimposed masonry. If any streams or other small
watercourses should be encountered, they must either be stopped or
led off where they will not affect the work, or, as is sometimes
done, the water issuing from them may be carried safely through the
masonry mass in small pipes. The object is to keep as much water out
of the foundation-bed as possible, so as to eliminate upward pressure
underneath the dam caused by the head of water in the subsequently full
reservoir. It is a question how much dependence can be placed upon the
exclusion of water from the foundation-bed. In the best class of work
undoubtedly the bond can be good enough to exclude more or less water,
but it is probably only safe and prudent so to design the dam as to be
stable even though water be not fully excluded.

[Illustration: Cross-section of New Croton Dam.]

The stability of the masonry dam must be secured both for the reservoir
full and empty. With a full reservoir the horizontal pressure of water
on the up-stream face tends to overturn the dam down-stream. When the
water is entirely withdrawn the pressure under the up-stream edge of
the foundation becomes much greater, so that safety and stability
under both extreme conditions must be assured. There are a number of
systems of computation to which engineers resort in order to secure a
design which shall certainly be stable under all conditions. That which
is commonly employed in this country is based upon two fundamental
propositions, under one of which the pressure at any point in the
entire masonry mass must not exceed a certain safe amount per square
foot, while the other is of a more technical character, requiring that
the centre of pressure shall, in every horizontal plane of the dam,
approach nowhere nearer than one third the horizontal thickness of
the masonry to one edge of it. A further condition is also prescribed
which prevents any portion of the dam from slipping or sliding over
that below it. As a matter of fact when the first two conditions are
assured the third is usually fulfilled concurrently. Obviously there
will be great advantage accruing to a dam if the entire mass of masonry
is essentially monolithic. In order that that may be the case either
concrete or rubble is usually employed for the great mass of the
masonry structure, the exterior surfaces frequently being composed of a
shell of cut-stone, so as to provide a neat and tasteful finish. This
exterior skin or layer of cut masonry need not average more than 1½ to
2½ feet thick.

The pressures prescribed for safety in the construction of masonry dams
vary from about 16,000 to 28,000 or 30,000 pounds per square foot.
Sometimes, as in the masonry dams found in the Croton watershed, limits
of 16,000 to 20,000 pounds per square foot are prescribed for the upper
portions of the dams and a gradually increasing pressure up to 30,000
pounds per square foot in passing downward to the foundation-bed. There
are reasons of a purely technical character why the prescribed safe
working pressure must be taken less on the down-stream or front side of
the dam than on the up-stream or rear face.

The section of a masonry dam designed under the conditions outlined
will secure stability through the weight of the structure alone, hence
it is called a gravity section. In some cases the rock bed and sides
of a ravine in which the stream must be dammed will permit a curved
structure to be built, the curvature being so placed as to be convex
up-stream or against the water pressure. In such a case the dam really
becomes a horizontal arch and, if the curvature is sufficiently sharp,
it may be designed as an arch horizontally pressed. The cross-section
then has much less thickness (and hence less area) than if designed
on a straight line so as to produce a gravity section. A number of
such dams have been built, and one very remarkable example of its kind
is the Bear Valley dam in California; it was built as a part of the
irrigation system.

[Illustration: Foundation Masonry of New Croton Dam.]




CHAPTER XVII.


=183. Gravity Supplies.=—When investigation has shown that a sufficient
quantity of water may be obtained for a required public supply from any
of the sources to which reference has been made, and that a sufficient
storage capacity may be provided to meet the exigencies of low rainfall
years, it will be evident if the water can be delivered to the points
of consumption by gravity, or whether pumping must be employed, or
recourse be made to both agencies.

If the elevation of the source of supply is sufficiently great to
permit the water to flow by gravity either to storage-reservoirs or to
service-reservoirs and thence to the points of consumption, a proper
pipe-line or conduit must be designed to afford a suitable channel. If
the topography permits, a conduit may be laid which does not run full,
but which has sufficient grade or slope to induce the water to flow in
it as if it were an open channel. This is the character of such great
closed masonry channels as the new and old Croton aqueducts of the
New York water-supply and the Sudbury and Wachusetts aqueducts of the
Boston supply. These conduits are of brick masonry backed with concrete
carried sometimes on embankments and sometimes through rock tunnels.
When they act like open channels a very small slope is employed, 0.7 of
a foot per mile being a ruling gradient for the new Croton aqueduct,
and 1 foot per mile for the Sudbury. Where these conduits cross
depressions and follow approximately the surface, or where they pass
under rivers, their construction must be changed so that they will not
only run full, but under greater or less pressure, as the case may be.

=184. Masonry Conduits.=—In general the conduits employed to bring
water from the watersheds to reservoirs at or near places of
consumption may be divided into two classes, masonry and metal,
although timber-stave pipes of large diameter are much used in the
western portion of the country. The masonry conduits obviously cannot
be permitted to run full, meaning under pressure, for the reason that
masonry is not adapted to resist the tension which would be created
under the head or pressure of water induced in the full pipe. They
must rather be so employed as to permit the water to flow with its
upper surface exposed to the atmosphere, although masonry conduits are
always closed at the top. In other words, they must be permitted to
run partially full, the natural grade or slope of the water surface
in them inducing the necessary velocity of flow or current. Evidently
the velocity in such masonry conduits is comparatively small, seldom
exceeding about 3 feet per second. The new and old Croton aqueducts,
the Sudbury and Wachusetts aqueducts of the Metropolitan Water-supply
of Boston, are excellent types of such conveyors of water. They are
sometimes of circular shape, but more frequently of the horseshoe
outline for the sides and top, with an inverted arch at the bottom for
the purpose of some concentration of flow when a small amount of water
is being discharged and for structural reasons.

The interiors of these conduits are either constructed of brick or
they may be of concrete or other masonry affording smooth surfaces.
In the latest construction Portland-cement concrete or that concrete
reinforced with light rods of iron or steel is much used. Bricks, if
employed, should be of good quality and laid accurately to the outline
desired with about ¼-inch joints, so as to offer as smooth a surface as
possible for the water to flow over. In special cases the interiors of
these conduits may be finished with a smooth coating of Portland-cement
mortar. If conduits are supported on embankments, great care must be
exercised in constructing their foundation supports, since any sensible
settlement would be likely to form cracks through which much water
might easily escape. When carried through tunnels they are frequently
made circular in outline. They must occasionally be cleaned, especially
in view of the fact that low orders of vegetable growths appear on
their sides and so obstruct the free flow of water.

=185. Metal Conduits.=—Metal conduits have been much used within the
past fifteen or twenty years. Among the most prominent of these are
the Hemlock Lake aqueduct of the Rochester Water-works, and that of
the East Jersey Water Company through which the water-supply of the
city of Newark, N. J., flows. When these metal conduits or pipes equal
24 to 30 or more inches in diameter they are usually made of steel
plates, the latter being of such thickness as is required to resist
the pressure acting within them. The riveted sections of these pipes
may be of cylindrical shape, each alternate section being sufficiently
small in diameter just to enter the other alternate sections of little
larger diameter, the interior diameter of the larger sections obviously
being equal to the interior diameter of the smaller sections plus twice
the thickness of the plate. Each section may also be slightly conical
in shape, the larger ends having a diameter just large enough to pass
sufficiently over the smaller end of the next section to form a joint.
Large cast-iron pipes are also sometimes used to form these metal
conduits up to an interior diameter of 48 inches. The selection of the
type of conduit within the limits of diameter adapted to both metals is
usually made a matter of economy. The interior of the cast-iron pipe is
smoother than that of the riveted steel, although this is not a serious
matter in deciding upon the type of pipe to be used.

Steel-plate conduits have been manufactured and used up to a diameter
of 9 feet. In this case the pipe was used in connection with
water-power purposes and with a length of 153 feet only, the plates
being ½ inch thick. The steel-plate conduits of the East Jersey Water
Company’s pipes are as follows:

    Diameter.    Thickness.      Length.

    48 inches     ¼   inch }
    48    ”      ⁵/₁₆   ”  }    21 miles.
    48    ”       ⅜     ”  }
    36    ”       ¼     ”        5   ”

The diameters and lengths of the metal pipes or conduits of the Hemlock
Lake conduit of the Rochester Water-works are as follows:

    36-inch wrought-iron pipe     9.60 miles.
    24   ”         ”      ”       2.96   ”
    24   ”  cast-iron pipe       15.82   ”
                                 -----
        Total                    28.39   ”

All metal conduits or pipes are carefully coated with a suitable
asphalt or tar preparation or varnish applied hot and sometimes baked
before being put in place. This is for the purpose of protecting the
metal against corrosion. Cast-iron pipes have been used longer and
much more extensively than wrought-iron or steel, but an experience
extending over thirty to forty years has shown that the latter class of
pipes possesses satisfactory durability and may be used to advantage
whenever economical considerations may be served.

=186. General Formula for Discharge of Conduits—Chezy’s Formula.=—It
is imperative in designing aqueducts of either masonry or metal to
determine their discharging capacity, which in general will depend
largely upon the slope of channel or head of water and the resistance
offered by the bed or interior of the pipe to the flow of water. The
resistance of liquid friction is so much more than all others in this
class of water-conveyors that it is usually the only one considered.
There is a certain formula much used by civil engineers for this
purpose; it is known as Chezy’s formula, for the reason that it was
first established by the French engineer Antoine Chezy about the year
1775, although it is an open question whether the beginnings of the
formula were not made twenty or more years prior to that date. Its
demonstration involves the general consideration of the resistance
which a liquid meets in flowing over any surface, such as that of the
interior of a pipe or conduit, or the bed and banks of a stream.

The force of liquid friction is found to be proportional to the
heaviness of the liquid (i.e., to the weight of a cubic unit, such as
a cubic foot), to the area of wetted surface over which the liquid
flows, and nearly to the square of the velocity with which the liquid
moves. Hence if _lʹ_ is the length of channel, _p_ the wetted portion
of the perimeter of the cross-section, _w_ the weight of a cubic unit
of the liquid, and _v_ the velocity, the total force of liquid friction
for the length _l′_ of channel will be _F = ζwpl′v²_, ζ being the
coefficient of liquid friction. The path of the force _F_ for a unit of
time is _v_, and the work _W_ which it performs in that unit of time is
equal to the weight _wal′_ falling through the height _h′_, _a_ being
the area of the cross-section of the stream.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

    Hence      _W_ = ζ_wplʹv².v_ = _wal′h′._                       (7)

              _a_              _____________________        ____
    ζ_v²v_ = ---- _hʹ_, _v_ = √(1/ζ) (_a/p_) (_h′/v_) = _c_√_rs_.  (8)
             _p_

In this equation

           _____        _a_
    _c_ = √(1/ζ); _r_ = ---- = hydraulic mean radius;
                        _p_
          _hʹ_
    _s_ = ----- = sine of inclination of stream’s bed.
           _v_

As the motion of the water is assumed to be uniform, the head lost by
friction for the total length of channel _l_ is the total fall _h_, and
by equation (8), since

    _h′          h_
    --- = _s_ = ---,
    _v           l_

          _v²     l_
    _h_ = ---- ---------.       (9)
          _c²_ (_a/p_)


If, as in the case of the ordinary cast-iron water-pipes of a public
supply system, the cross-section _a_ is circular,

    _a_   (π_d²_/4)   _d_
    --- = --------- = ---,
    _p_     π_d_       4

and

          4.2_g  l    v²          l   v²_
    _h_ = ----- --- ------ = _f_ --- -----,      (10)
           _c²   d_  2_g          d_  2_g_

in which _f_ = 8_g_ ÷ _c²_.

The quantity _f_ is sometimes called the “friction factor.” For smooth,
new pipes from 4 feet down to 3 inches in diameter its value may be
taken from .015 to .03. An approximate mean value may be taken at .02.

The last member of equation (8) is Chezy’s formula, and it is one of
the most used expressions in hydraulic engineering. Some values for
the coefficient _c_ will presently be given. The quantity _r_ found
by dividing the area of the cross-section of the stream by the wetted
portion of its perimeter is called the “hydraulic mean radius,” or
simply the “mean radius.” The other quantity, _s_, appearing in the
formula is, as shown by the figure, the sine of the inclination of the
bed of the stream.

In order to determine the discharge of any pipe, conduit, or open
channel carrying a known depth of water, it is only necessary to
compute _r_ and _s_ from known data and select such a value of the
coefficient _c_ as may best fit the circumstances of the particular
case in question. The substitution of those quantities in Chezy’s
formula, i.e., equation (8), will give the mean velocity _v_ of the
water which, when multiplied by the area of cross-section of the
stream, will give the discharge of the latter per second of time. It
is customary to compute _r_ in feet. The coefficient _c_ is always
determined so as to give velocity in feet per second of time. Hence if
the area of the cross-section of the stream, _a_, is taken in square
feet, as is ordinarily the case, the discharge _av_ will be in cubic
feet per second.

[Illustration: Progress View of Construction of New Croton Dam.]

=187. Kutter’s Formula.=—The coefficient _c_ in Chezy’s formula is
not a constant quantity, but it varies with the mean radius _r_, with
the sine of inclination _s_, and with the character of the bottom and
sides of the open channel, i.e., with the roughness of the interior
surface of the closed pipe. Many efforts have been made and much labor
expended in order to find an expression for this coefficient which may
accurately fit various streams and pipes. These efforts have met with
only a moderate degree of success. The form of expression for _c_ which
is used most among engineers is that known as Kutter’s formula, as it
was established by the Swiss engineer W. R. Kutter. This formula is as
follows:

               (  1.811           .00281)
           ___ ( ------ + 41.65 + ------)
          √_r_ (    _n               s_ )
    _c_ = ---- (------------------------)
           _n_ (  ___                   )
               ( √_r_           .00281  )
               ( ----- + 41.65 + ------ )
               (   _n               s_  )

The quantity _n_ in this formula is called the “coefficient of
roughness,” since its value depends upon the character of the surface
over which the water flows. It has the following set of values for the
surfaces indicated:

    _n_ = 0.009 for well-planed timber;
    _n_ = 0.010 for neat cement;
    _n_ = 0.011 for cement with one third sand;
    _n_ = 0.012 for unplaned timber;
    _n_ = 0.013 for ashlar and brickwork;
    _n_ = 0.015 for unclean surfaces in sewers and conduits;
    _n_ = 0.017 for rubble masonry;
    _n_ = 0.020 for canals in very firm gravel;
    _n_ = 0.025 for canals and rivers free from stones and weeds;
    _n_ = 0.030 for canals and rivers with some stones and weeds;
    _n_ = 0.035 for canals and rivers in bad order.

=188. Hydraulic Gradient.=—Before illustrating the use of Chezy’s
formula in connection with masonry and metal conduits, of which mention
has already been made, it is best to define another quantity constantly
used in connection with closed iron or steel pipes. This quantity is
called the “hydraulic gradient.” If a closed iron or steel pipe is
running full of water and under pressure and if small vertical tubes
be inserted in the top of the pipe with their lower ends bent so as
to be at right angles to its axis, the water will rise to heights in
the tubes depending upon the pressures of water in the pipe or conduit
at the points of insertion. Such tubes with the water columns in them
are called piezometers. They are constantly used in connection with
water-pipes in order to show the pressures at the points where they are
inserted. A number of such pipes being inserted along an iron pipe or
conduit, a line may be imagined to be drawn through the upper surfaces
of the columns of water, and that line is called the “hydraulic
gradient.” It represents the upper surface of water in an open channel
discharging with the same velocity existing in the closed pipe.

In case Chezy’s formula is used to determine the velocity of discharge
in a closed pipe running under pressure, the sine of inclination _s_
must be that of the hydraulic gradient and not the sine of inclination
of the axis of the closed pipe. In the determination of this quantity
_s_ by the use of piezometer tubes, if a straight pipe remains of
constant section between any two points, it is only necessary to insert
the tubes at those points and observe the difference in levels of the
water columns in them. That difference of levels or elevations will
represent the height which is to be divided by the length of pipe or
conduit between the same two points in order to determine the sine _s_.

[Illustration: Progress View of Construction of New Croton Dam.]

The hydraulic gradient plays a very important part in the construction
of a long pipe-line or conduit. If any part of the pipe should rise
above the hydraulic gradient, the discharge would no longer be full
below that point. It is necessary, therefore, always to lay the pipe or
the closed conduit so that all parts of it shall be below the hydraulic
gradient. Caution is obviously necessary to lay a pipe carrying water
deep enough below the surface of the ground in cold climates to protect
the water against freezing. At the same time if the pipe-line is a long
one it must follow the surface of the ground approximately in order to
save expensive cutting. There will, therefore, generally be summits
in pipe-lines, and inasmuch as all potable water carries some air
dissolved in it, that air is liable to accumulate at the high points or
summits. If that accumulation goes on long enough, it will seriously
trench upon the carrying capacity of the pipe and decrease its flow. It
is therefore necessary to provide at summits what are called blow-off
cocks to let the air escape. At the low points of the pipe-line, on the
contrary, the solid matter, such as sand and dirt, carried by the water
is liable to accumulate, and it is customary to arrange blow-offs also
at such points, so as to enable some of the water to escape and carry
with it the sand and dirt.

[Illustration: IN LOOSE EARTH.]

[Illustration: IN ROCK.

Weston Aqueduct. Sections of Aqueduct and Embankment.]

[Illustration: SECTION OF EMBANKMENT.]

[Illustration: ON EMBANKMENT.

Weston Aqueduct. Sections of Aqueduct and Embankment. Gradient, 1 in
5000.]

=189. Flow of Water in Large Masonry Conduits.=—In order to apply
Chezy’s formula first to the flow of the masonry aqueducts of the New
York and Boston water-supplies, it is necessary to have the outlines of
those conduits so that the wetted perimeter and hence the mean radius
may be determined for any depth of water in them.

[Illustration: OUTLINES OF AQUADUCTS.

FIG. 3.]

The figure shows the desired cross-sections drawn carefully to scale.
Table XIV has been computed and arranged from data taken from various
official sources so as to show the depth, mean velocity, discharge per
second and per twenty-four hours, and the coefficient used in Chezy’s
formula, together with the coefficient of roughness _n_ in Kutter’s
formula for the conduits shown in the figure.

This table exhibits in a concise and clear manner the use of Chezy’s
formula in this class of hydraulic work.

TABLE XIV.

    LEGEND:
        (A) = Depth, in Feet.
        (B) = Hydraulic Radius _r_, Feet.
        (C) = Coefficient _c_.
        (D) = Mean Velocity, Feet.
    --------------------------+----+-----+--------+-------+------
                              |    |     | Grade  |       |
            Aqueducts.        | (A)| (B) |  _s_.  |  (C)  | (D)
    --------------------------+----+-----+--------+-------+------
    † New Croton (1899)       |8.42|3.974|.0001326| 153.3 | 3.52
    †  ”    ”  (after two     |    |     |        |       |
                 years’ use)  | .. |2.338|    ”   | 131.3 | 2.312
    ‡  ”    ”                 | .. |1    |    ”   | 119.3 | 1.374
    ‡  ”    ”                 | .. |1.5  |    ”   | 126.3 | 1.781
    ‡  ”    ”                 | .. |2    |    ”   | 129.8 | 2.114
    ‡  ”    ”                 | .. |2.5  |    ”   | 132   | 2.404
    ‡  ”    ”                 | .. |3    |    ”   | 133.4 | 2.661
    ‡  ”    ”                 | .. |3.5  |    ”   | 134   | 2.887
    ‡  ”    ”                 | .. |4    |    ”   | 134.4 | 3.095
    Old Croton (1899) clean   |6   |2.338|   ..   | 133.4 | 2.958
     ”     ”   ordinary       |    |     |        |       |
    condition;                |    |     |        |       |
    not clean                 |6   |2.338|   ..   | 123.2 |   ..
     ”     ”   not clean      |7.33|2.368|   ..   | 118.2 |   ..
    Dorchester Bay tunnel     | .. |1.875|   ..   | 119   |
       ”        ”             | .. |2.338|   ..   | 125.0 |   ..
    Wachusetts, new; probably |    |     |        |       |
        clean (approx.)       | .. | ..  |   ..   | 144.9 |
    Sudbury, clean            | .. | .5  |.000189 | 116.9 | 1.14
       ”       ”              | .. |1.0  |    ”   | 127.0 | 1.74
       ”       ”              | .. |1.5  |    ”   | 133.3 | 2.24
       ”       ”              | .. |2.0  |    ”   | 137.8 | 2.68
       ”       ”              | .. |2.5  |    ”   | 140.4 | 3.04
    --------------------------+----+-----+--------+-------+------
    --------------------------+----------------------+--------
                              |      Discharge.      |
    --------------------------+----------------------+
                              |Cubic Feet|  Gallons  |  _n_ in
            Aqueducts.        |    per   |    per    |Kutter’s
                              |  Second. | 24 Hours. |Formula.
    --------------------------+----------+-----------+--------
    † New Croton (1899)       |   371.6  |240,200,000|
    †  ”    ”  (after two     |          |           |
                 years’ use)  |    ..    |     ..    |  .0133
    ‡  ”    ”                 |          |           |
    ‡  ”    ”                 |          |           |
    ‡  ”    ”                 |          |           |
    ‡  ”    ”                 |          |           |
    ‡  ”    ”                 |          |           |
    ‡  ”    ”                 |          |           |
    ‡  ”    ”                 |          |           |
    Old Croton (1899) clean   |   122.8  | 79,400,000|  .0133
     ”     ”   ordinary       |          |           |
    condition;                |          |           |
    not clean                 |    ..    | 73,300,000|
     ”     ”   not clean      |    ..    | 85,600,000|
    Dorchester Bay tunnel     |          |           |
       ”        ”             |    ..    |     ..    |  .014
    Wachusetts, new; probably |          |           |
        clean (approx.)       |          |           |
    Sudbury, clean            |          |           |
       ”       ”              |          |           |
       ”       ”              |          |           |
       ”       ”              |          |           |
       ”       ”              |          |           |
    --------------------------+----------+-----------+--------

    † From report by J. R. Freeman to B. S. Coler, 1899.
    ‡ From report of New York Aqueduct Commission.

=190. Flow of Water through Large Closed Pipes.=—The masonry conduits
to which consideration has been given in the preceding paragraphs
carry water precisely as in an open canal, but the closed conduits or
pipes of steel plates and cast-iron, like the Hemlock Lake conduit at
Rochester and the East Jersey conduit of the Newark Water-works, are of
an entirely different type, as they carry water under pressure. Hence
the slope or sine of inclination _s_ belongs to the hydraulic gradient
rather than to the grade of the pipe itself. Where the pipe-line is a
long one its average grade frequently does not differ much from the
hydraulic gradient, but the latter quantity must always be used. As
in the case of the masonry conduits, the coefficient _c_ in Chezy’s
formula will vary considerably with the degree of roughness of the
interior surface of the pipe, with the slope _s_, and with the mean
radius _r_. An important distinction must be made between riveted steel
pipes and those of cast-iron, for the reason that the rivet-heads
on the inside of the former exert an appreciable influence upon the
coefficient _c_. The rivet-heads add to the roughness or unevenness of
the interior of the pipe. Table XV gives the elements of the flow or
discharge in the two pipe-lines which have been taken as types, as
determined by actual measurements; it also exhibits similar elements
for timber-stave pipes, to which reference will be made later.

[Illustration: CROTON AQUEDUCT

IN EARTH.]

As would be expected, the velocity of flow in these pipes may be and
generally is considerably higher than the velocity of movement in
masonry channels. Both Tables XV and XVI give considerable range of
coefficients computed and arranged from authoritative sources, and
the coefficients _c_ for Chezy’s formula represent the best hydraulic
practice in connection with such works at the present time. In using
the formula for any special case, great care must be taken to select
a value for _c_ which has been established for conditions as closely
as possible to those in question. This is essential in order that the
results of estimated discharges may not be disappointing, as they
sometimes have been where that condition so necessary to accuracy has
not been fulfilled.

TABLE XV.

                                   VALUES OF COEFFICIENT _c_.
    LEGEND:
        (A) = Hydraulic Radius _r_.
        (B) = Hydraulic Gradient.
        (C) = Mean Velocity.
    ------------------------------+-----------------+-----+-------+------
                                  |                 |     |       |
              Pipe-line.          |    Diameter.    |     |       |
                                  |                 | (A) |  (B)  | (C)
    ------------------------------+-----------------+-----+-------+------
    Hemlock Lake                  |36″ wrought-iron |  9″ |.000411| 1.532
       ”     ”                    |24″ wr’t and cast|  6″ |.00239 | 3.448
    Rush Lake to Mt. Hope         |24″ cast-iron    |  6″ |.00255 | 3.448
    ------------------------------+-----------------+-----+-------+------
    Sudbury aqueduct              |48″   ”   ”      | 12″ |       | 3.738
       ”       ”                  |48″   ”   ”      | 12″ |       | 4.965
       ”       ”                  |48″   ”   ”      | 12″ |       | 6.195
       ”       ”                  |48″   ”   ”      | 12″ |       | 3.738
       ”       ”                  |48″   ”   ”      | 12″ |       | 4.965
       ”       ”                  |48″   ”   ”      | 12″ |       | 6.195
    ------------------------------+-----------------+-----+-------+------
    East Jersey Water Co.         |48″ steel riveted| 12″ |.002   | 4.62
                                  |        pipe     |     |       |
    Timber-stave pipe, Ogden, Utah|72″.5            |     |       |  .5
      ”      ”    ”      ”     ”  |72″.5            |     |       | 1.0
      ”      ”    ”      ”     ”  |72″.5            |     |       | 1.5
      ”      ”    ”      ”     ”  |72″.5            |     |       | 2.0
      ”      ”    ”      ”     ”  |72″.5            |     |       | 2.5
      ”      ”    ”      ”     ”  |72″.5            |     |       | 3.0
      ”      ”    ”      ”     ”  |72″.5            |     |       | 3.5
      ”      ”    ”      ”     ”  |72″.5            |     |       | 4.0
    ------------------------------+-----------------+-----+-------+------
    LEGEND:
         (A) = Coefficient _c_.
         (B) = Cubic Feet per Second.
         (C) = Gallons per 24 Hours.
    ------------------------------+-------+--------+---------+---------
                                  |       |     Discharge.   |
              Pipe-line.          |       +--------+---------+
                                  |  (A)  |   (B)  |   (C)   | Remarks.
    ------------------------------+-------+--------+---------+---------
    Hemlock Lake                  | 87.3  |10.83124|7,000,000|
       ”     ”                    | 99.7  |10.83124|7,000,000| 1892.
    Rush Lake to Mt. Hope         | 96.5  |10.83124|7,000,000+---------
    Sudbury aqueduct              |140.14 |        |         |
       ”       ”                  |142.11 |        |         | Pipe new
       ”       ”                  |144.09 |        |         | 1880.
                                  |       |        |         +---------
                                  |       |        |         | After
                                  |       |        |         | cleaning,
       ”       ”                  |139.94†|        |         | 1894-95.
       ”       ”                  |141.74†|        |         | Before
       ”       ”                  |143.16†|        |         | cleaning,
                                  |       |        |         |_c_ = 108
                                  |       |        |         +---------
    East Jersey Water Co.         |103.3  | 58.02  |7,500,000| 1891.
    Timber-stave pipe, Ogden, Utah| 72    |        |         | 1897.
      ”      ”    ”               | 96    |        |         |
      ”      ”    ”               |109    |        |         |
      ”      ”    ”               |115    |        |         |
      ”      ”    ”               |119    |        |         |
      ”      ”    ”               |122    |        |         |
      ”      ”    ”               |124    |        |         |
      ”      ”    ”               |126    |        |         |
    ------------------------------+-------+--------+---------+---------

     † These values correspond to the formula _c_ = 131.88_v_⁰˙⁰⁴⁵.

TABLE XVI.

                               ___
    VALUES OF _c_ IN _v_ = _c_√_rs_.
    --------------+------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----
                  |      No.   |  1  |  2  |  3  |  4  |   5 |  6
    --------------+------------+-----+-----|-----+-----+-----+-----
                  |            |     |  4  |     |     |     |
                  |     Age    | New |Years| New | New | New | New
    --------------+------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----
       Velocity,  |    Diam.   |     |     |     |     |     |
       Feet/sec.  |    Inches  | 36  |  36 | 38  | 38  | 42  | 42
    --------------+------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----
          0.5     |            |     |     |     |     |     |
            1     |            | 86  |     |     |     |     | 96
          1.48    |            |     |     |     |     |     |
          1.5     |            | 90.6|     |     |     |     |103
          2.0     |            | 95.2|     |     |     |     |107.9
          2.44    |            |     |     |     |     |115.9|
          2.5     |            | 99.4|     |     |     |     |111
          3       |            |103.3|     |     |     |     |112.6
          3.23    |            |     |     |114  |     |     |
          3.27    |            |     |     |116.6|     |     |
          3.32    |_c_ in _v_ =|     |     |     |     |     |
          3.5     |       ___  |107  |     |     |     |     |113
          3.52    |    _c√rs_. |     |     |     |     |     |
          3.9     |            |     |     |     |109.2|     |
          3.96    |            |     |     |     |     |     |
          4       |            |110.6|     |     |     |     | 112.8
          4.5     |            |114  |     |     |     |     | 111.8
          4.93    |            |     |106.3|     |     |     |
          5       |            |117.2|     |     |     |     | 110.8
          5.5     |            |120.4|     |     |     |     | 110.2
          6       |            |123.6|     |     |     |     | 110
         12.6     |            |     |     |     |     |     |
    --------------+------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+------
    Kutter’s _n_ =|            |     |     |     |     |     |
     coefficient  |            | .014| .013| .013| .013| .013| .013
    of roughness  |            |     |     |     |     |     |
    --------------+------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----
                  |      No.   |  7  |  8  |  9  | 10  |  11 |12  | 13
    --------------+------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----
                  |            |     |     |  4  | 4   |     |    |  5
                  |     Age    | New | New |Years|Years| New | New|Years
    --------------+------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----
       Velocity,  |    Diam.   |     |     |     |     |     |    |
    Feet per sec. |    Inches  | 42  | 48  | 48  | 48  | 48  | 72 | 103
    --------------+------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----
          0.5     |            |     |     |     |     |     |110 |126.5
            1     |            |101  |101.2| 78  | 97.2| 97.1|110 |116.6
          1.48    |            |     |     |     |     |     |    |
          1.5     |            |102.8|105.4| 84.6|100.8| 98.7|111 |112.7
          2.0     |            |104.3|108.8| 89.6|103.3|100.3|110 |110.3
          2.44    |            |     |     |     |     |     |    |
          2.5     |            |105.5|111.2| 92.4|104.9|101.6|108 |108.8
          3       |            |106.4|111.8| 93  |105.3|102.2|108 |107.7
          3.23    |            |     |     |     |     |     |    |
          3.27    |            |     |     |     |     |     |    |
          3.32    |_c_ in _v_ =|     |     |     |     |     |    |
          3.5     |       ___  |107.2|113.4| 93.2|104.8|103.6|110 |106.9
          3.52    |    _c√rs_. |     |     |     |     |     |    |
          3.9     |            |     |     |     |     |     |    |
          3.96    |            |     |     |     |     |     |    |
          4       |            |107.8|113.2| 94  |104  |104.2|111 |106.2
          4.5     |            |108.2|112.4| 94.2|103.7|104.7|    |105.6
          4.93    |            |     |     |     |     |     |    |
          5       |            |108.4|112  | 94.4|103.7|105.1|    |
          5.5     |            |108.5|111.7| 94.7|103.7|105.2|    |
          6       |            |108.5|111.6| 94.9|103.7|105.2|    |
         12.6     |            |     |     |     |     |     |    |
    --------------+------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----
    Kutter’s _n_ =|            |     |     |     |     |     |    |
     coefficient  |            | .013| .013| .016| .014| .014|.014| .015
    of roughness  |            |     |     |     |     |     |    |
    --------------+------------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+----+-----

    Exp. Nos. 1-2.  Clemens Herschel, 1802. East Jersey Conduit,
                    cylindrical joints.
         Nos. 3-4.  E. Kuichling, 1895. New Rochester conduit,
                    cylindrical joints.
         No. 5.     I. W. Smith, 1896. Portland, Oregon, water-works.
         Nos. 6-7.  Clemens Herschel, 1896. East Jersey conduit,
                    taper joints.
         No. 8.     Clemens Herschel, 1892. East Jersey conduit,
                    cylindrical joints.
         Nos. 9-10. Clemens Herschel, 1896. East Jersey conduit,
                    cylindrical joints.
         No. 11.    Clemens Herschel, 1896. East Jersey conduit,
                    taper joints.
         No. 12.    Marx, Wing, Hoskins, 1897. Pioneer El. Power Co.,
                    Ogden, Utah.
         No. 13.    Clemens Herschel, 1887. Holyoke, Mass.,
                    testing flume.

[Illustration: CROTON AQUEDUCT

IN ROCK.]

=191. Change of Hydraulic Gradient by Changing Diameter of Pipe.=—It
has already been seen, in the case of closed pipes or conduits, that
the hydraulic gradient with slope _s_ governs the velocity of flow, and
also that all parts of the pipe-line must be kept below that gradient.
It is sometimes desirable, in order to meet conditions either of
topography or of flow, to raise or lower the hydraulic gradient over
the whole or some portion of the pipe-line. This can easily be done
to any needed extent by varying the diameter of the pipe. An increase
in diameter will in general decrease the velocity of the water and
increase its pressure, thus increasing correspondingly the height of
the columns of water in the piezometer tubes. As the top surface of the
latter determines the hydraulic gradient, it is seen that increasing
the diameter of a portion of the pipe-line will correspondingly
raise the gradient over the same portion. Thus by a proper relative
variation of diameters the hydraulic gradient of a given pipe-line may
readily be controlled within sufficient limits to meet any ordinary
requirements of this character.

=192. Control of Flow by Gates at Upper End of Pipe-line.=—Obviously,
if the pressure in the pipe-line is diminished, less thickness of metal
will be required to resist it, and a corresponding degree of economy
may be reached by a decrease in the quantity of metal. In the 21 miles
of 48-inch steel-plate pipe of the East Jersey Water Company there is
a fall of 340 feet; if, therefore, the flow through that pipe were
regulated by a gate or gates at its lower end, the lower portion of the
line would be subjected to great intensity of pressure. If, however,
the flow through the pipe is controlled by a gate or gates at its
upper end, enough water only may be admitted to enable it to flow full
with the velocity due to the hydraulic gradient. By such a procedure
the pressure upon the pipe over and above that which is necessary to
produce the gradient is avoided. This condition is not only judicious
in the reduction of the amount of metal required, but also in reducing
both the leakage and the tendency to further leakage, which is largely
increased by high pressures. This feature of control of pressure in a
long pipe-line with considerable fall is always worthy of most careful
consideration.

=193. Flow in Old and New Cast-iron Pipes—Tubercles.=—The velocity of
flow through cast-iron mains or conduits or through the cast-iron pipes
of a distribution system of public water-supply depends largely upon
the condition of the interior surface of the pipes as affected by age.
All cast-iron pipes before being shipped from the foundry where they
are manufactured are immersed in a hot bath of suitable coal-tar pitch
composition in order to protect them from corrosion. After having been
in use a few years this coating on the interior of the pipes is worn
off in spots and corrosion at once begins. The iron oxide produced
under these circumstances forms projections, or tubercles as they are
called, of greatly exaggerated volume and out of all proportion to
the actual weight of oxide of iron. When the pipes are emptied these
tubercles are readily removed by scraping, but before their removal
they greatly obstruct the flow of water through the pipes. Indeed this
obstruction is so great that the discharging capacity of cast-iron
mains must be treated in view of its depreciation from this source.

Table XVII exhibits the value of the coefficient _c_ to be used in
Chezy’s formula for all cast-iron pipes having been in use for the
periods shown.

TABLE XVII.

                       TABLE OF VALUES OF _f_ AND _c_.
     LEGEND:
         (A) = Diameter, Inches.
         (B) = Hydraulic Radius _r_, Inches.
         (C) = Velocity, Feet per Second.
         (D) = Coefficient _c_.
         (E) = Coefficient _f_.
     ---------+-------------------------+-----+----+-----+-----+------
              |                         |     |    |     |     |
    Authority.|       Pipe-line.        |     |    |     |     |
              |                         | (A) |(B) | (C) | (D) |  (E)
              |                         |     |    |     |     |
     ---------+-------------------------+-----+----+-----+-----+------
     Darcy    |New Pipe                 | 3.22| .8 | 0.29| 78.5| .0418
              |                         |     |    |10.71|100.0| .0257
     ---------+-------------------------+-----+----+-----+-----+------
     Darcy    |Old cast-iron pipe lined | 9.63|2.41| 1.00| 72.5| .0489
              |     with deposit        |     |    |12.42| 74.0| .0468
     ---------+-------------------------+-----+----+-----+-----+------
     Darcy    |Pipe above cleaned       | 9.63|2.41| 0.91| 90.0| .0316
              |                         |     |    |14.75| 98.0| .0269
     ---------+-------------------------+-----+----+-----+-----+------
     Brush    |Cast-iron pipe tar-coated|20   |5   | 2.00|114.0| .0197
              | and in service 5 years. |     |    | 3.00|110.0| .0214
     ---------+-------------------------+-----+----+-----+-----+------
     Darrach  |Cast-iron pipe in service|20   |5   | 2.71| 67.5| .0568
              |       11 years          |     |    | 5.11| 83.0| .0376
     ---------+-------------------------+-----+----+-----+-----+------
     Darrach  |Cast-iron pipe in service|36   |9   | 1.58| 60.0| .0716
              |        7 years          |     |    | 2.37| 66.0| .0586
     ---------+-------------------------+-----+----+-----+-----+------

Obviously it is not possible to clean the smaller pipes of a
distribution system, but large cast-iron conduits may be emptied at
suitable periods and have their interior surfaces cleaned of tubercles
or other accumulations. At the same time, if necessary, a new coal-tar
coating can be applied.

Table XVIII exhibits the values of the coefficient _c_ to be used in
Chezy’s formula for new and clean coated cast-iron pipes. It represents
the results of actual hydraulic experience and is taken from Hamilton
Smith’s “Hydraulics.” A comparison between this table and that which
precedes will show how serious the effect of tubercles may be on the
discharging capacity of a cast-iron pipe.

                                        ____
    In using Chezy’s formula, _v_ = _c_√_rs_,

in connection with either Table XVII or XVIII, the slope or sine of
inclination _s_ of the hydraulic gradient may be readily computed
by equation (10), which gives the head lost by friction in a closed
circular pipe as

                _l   v²_
    _h_ = _f_ - --- ----.
                _d_  2_g_

It is only necessary in a straight pipe or one nearly straight to
compute the quantity

          _h     f    v²_
    _s_ = --- = --- ------.
          _l    d_   2_g_

TABLE XVIII.

                                         ____
    VALUES OF _c_ IN FORMULA: _v_ = _c__√_rs_.
    --------+------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
    Velocity|                Diameters in Feet (_d_ = 4_r_).
      _v_,  |
    Feet per|------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
     Second.| .05  |   .1  |   1   |  1.5  |   2   |  2.5  |   3
    --------+------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
        1   |      |  80.0 |  96.1 | 102.8 | 108.8 | 112.7 | 116.7
        2   | 77.8 |  88.9 | 104.0 | 110.9 | 116.2 | 120.3 | 123.8
        3   | 82.4 |  93.7 | 108.7 | 115.6 | 120.8 | 124.8 | 128.3
        4   | 85.6 |  97.0 | 112.0 | 118.9 | 124.0 | 128.1 | 131.5
        5   | 87.6 |  99.3 | 114.4 | 121.3 | 126.5 | 130.6 | 134.1
        6   | 89.1 | 101.0 | 116.3 | 123.2 | 128.6 | 132.6 | 136.3
        7   | 90.0 | 102.4 | 118.0 | 125.0 | 130.4 | 134.6 | 138.2
        8   | 90.0 | 103.3 | 119.3 | 126.4 | 132.0 | 136.3 | 140.0
        9   | 90.7 | 104.0 | 120.4 | 127.7 | 133.3 | 137.7 | 141.6
       10   | 90.8 | 104.5 | 121.4 | 128.8 | 134.5 | 139.0 | 142.9
       11   | 90.9 | 104.7 | 122.0 | 129.7 | 135.6 | 140.2 | 144.2
       12   | 91.0 | 104.8 | 122.5 | 130.4 | 136.4 | 141.1 | 145.2
       13   | 91.0 | 105.0 | 122.9 | 131.0 | 137.1 | 141.9 | 146.1
       14   | 91.0 | 105.0 | 123.2 | 131.5 | 137.6 | 142.5 | 146.7
       15   | 91.0 | 105.0 | 123.6 | 131.8 | 138.0 | 142.9 | 147.2
       20(?)|      |       | 123.9 | 132.9 |       |       |
    --------+------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
    Velocity|     Diameters in Feet (_d = 4r_).
      _v_,  |
    Feet per+------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
     Second.| 3.5  |   4   |   5   |   6   |   7   |   8
    --------+------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
        1   |120.2 | 123.0 | 127.8 | 131.8 | 134.8 | 137.5
        2   |127.0 | 129.9 | 134.3 | 138.0 | 141.0 | 143.3
        3   |131.4 | 134.2 | 138.6 | 142.3 | 145.4 | 147.6
        4   |134.6 | 137.4 | 141.9 | 145.5 | 148.6 | 151.0
        5   |137.1 | 140.0 | 144.7 | 148.1 | 151.2 | 153.6
        6   |139.4 | 142.3 | 146.9 | 150.5 | 153.5 |
        7   |141.5 | 144.5 | 149.0 | 152.7 |       |
        8   |143.3 | 146.3 | 151.0 | 154.9 |       |
        9   |145.0 | 148.1 | 152.8 | 156.7 |       |
       10   |146.4 | 149.7 | 154.6 |       |       |
       11   |147.7 | 151.0 |       |       |       |
       12   |148.8 | 152.3 |       |       |       |
       13   |149.8 | 153.2 |       |       |       |
       14   |150.5 | 154.0 |       |       |       |
       15   |151.1 | 154.6 |       |       |       |
       20(?)|      |       |       |       |       |
    --------+------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------

=194. Timber-stave Pipes.=—In the western part of the country long
conduits or pipe-lines are frequently constructed of timber called
redwood. Staves of suitable thickness, sometimes 1¾ inches, are
accurately shaped and finished with smooth surfaces so as to form large
pipes of any desired diameter. These staves are held rigidly in place
with steel bands drawn tight with nuts on screw ends, so as to close
tightly the joints between them. Such wooden conduits are rapidly and
cheaply built and are very durable. They have the further advantage
of requiring no interior coating, as the timber surface remains
indefinitely unaffected by the water flowing over it. The latter part
of Table XV shows coefficients for Chezy’s formula which may be used
for such a class of timber conduits. As the interior surfaces of such
closed conduits are always very smooth, the coefficients are seen to
be relatively large, and such pipes are, therefore, well adapted to
maintain unimpaired discharging capacity for great lengths of time.




CHAPTER XVIII.


=195. Pumping and Pumps.=—When it is impossible to secure water at
sufficient elevation to be delivered to the points of consumption by
gravity, it is necessary to resort to pumping in order to raise it
to the desired level. Indeed it is sometimes necessary to resort to
pumping in connection with a gravity supply in order to deliver water
to the higher parts of the distribution system, the lower points being
supplied by gravity. This combination of gravity supply with pumping
is not unusual. That part of New York north of Thirty-fourth Street
between Lexington and Fifth avenues, north of Thirty-fifth Street
between Fifth and Sixth avenues, north of Fifty-first Street between
Sixth and Ninth avenues, north of Fifty-fifth Street between Ninth and
Tenth avenues, north of Fifty-eighth Street between Tenth and Eleventh
avenues, and north of Seventy-second Street between Eleventh Avenue
and the North River, with elevation of 60 feet or more above mean high
tide-water, is supplied from the high-service reservoir near High
Bridge, the water being elevated to it from the Croton supply by the
pumping-station at the westerly end of the bridge. The elevation of the
water surface in the High Bridge reservoir is 208 feet, and that of the
large reservoir in Central Park 115 feet, above mean high tide-water.
Some specially high points on the northern part of Manhattan Island are
supplied from the High Bridge tower, whose water surface is 316 feet
above mean high tide.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Skeleton Pumps.]

The pumps employed for the purpose of elevating water to
distributing-reservoirs are among the finest pieces of machinery built
by engineers at the present time. They are usually actuated by steam
as a motive power, the steam being supplied from suitable boilers or
batteries of boilers in which coal is generally used as fuel. The
modern pumping-engine is in reality a combination of three classes of
machinery, the boilers, the steam-engines, and the pumps. There are
various types of boilers as well as of engines and pumps, all, when
judiciously designed and arranged, well adapted to the pumping-engine
process. The pumps are generally what are called displacement
pumps; that is, the water in the pump-cylinder is displaced by the
reciprocating motion of a piston or plunger. These pumps may be either
double-acting or single-acting; in the former case, as the piston or
plunger moves in one direction it forces the water ahead of it into
the main or pipe leading up to the reservoir into which the water is
to be delivered, while the water rising from the pump-well follows back
of the piston or plunger to the end of its stroke. When the motion
is reversed the latter water is forced on its way upward through the
main, while the water rises from the pump-well into the other end of
the water-cylinder. In the case of single-acting pumps water is drawn
up into the water-cylinder from the pump-well during one stroke and
forced up through the main during the next stroke, one operation only
being performed at one time. The pump-well is a well or tank, usually
of masonry, into which the water runs by gravity and from which the
pump raises it to the reservoir. For the purposes of accessibility and
convenience in repairing, the pump is always placed at an elevation
above the water in the pump-well, the pressure of the atmosphere on the
water in the well forcing the latter up into the pump-cylinder as the
piston recedes in its stroke. The height of a column of water 1 square
inch in section representing the pressure of the atmosphere per square
inch is about 34 feet, but a pump-cylinder should not be placed more
than about 18 feet above the surface of the water in the pump-well in
order that the water may rise readily as it follows the stroke of the
plunger.

In the operation of the ordinary pump the direction of the water as it
flows into and out of the pump-cylinder must necessarily be reversed,
and this is true also with the type of pump called the differential
plunger-pump, which is really a single-acting pump designed so as to
act in driving the water into the main like a double-acting pump,
i.e., both motions of the plunger force water through the main, but
only one draws water from the pump-well into the pump-cylinder. Valves
may be so arranged in the pump-piston as to make the progress of the
water through the pump continuous in one direction and so avoid the
irregularities and shocks which necessarily arise to some extent from a
reversal of the motion of the water.

The steam is used in the steam-cylinders of a pumping-engine precisely
as in every other type of steam-engine. At the present time compound
or triple-expansion engines are generally used, among the well-known
types being the Worthington duplex direct-acting pump without crank or
fly-wheel, the Gaskill crank and fly-wheel pumping-engine, the Allis
and the Leavitt pumping-engines, both of the latter employing the crank
and fly-wheel and both may be used as single- or double-acting pumps,
usually as the latter. The characteristic feature of the well-known
Worthington pumping-engine is the movement of the valves of each of the
two engines by the other for the purpose of securing a quiet seating of
the valves and smooth working.

One of the most important details of the pumping-engine is the
system of valves in the water-cylinder, and much ingenuity has been
successfully expended in the design of proper valve systems. These
pump-valves must, among other things, meet the following requirements
as efficiently as possible: they must close promptly and tightly, so
that no water may pass through them to create slip or leakage; they
should have a small lift, so as to allow prompt closing, and large
waterways, to permit a free flow through them with little resistance;
they must also be easily operated, so as to require little power,
and, like all details of machinery, they should be simple and easily
accessible for repairing when necessary.

As steam is always used expansively, its force impelling the plunger
will have a constant value during the early portion of the stroke
only, and a much less value, due to the expansion of the steam, at
and near the end of the stroke, while the head of water against which
the pump operates is practically constant. There is, therefore, an
excess of effort during the first part of the stroke and a deficiency
during the latter part. Unless there should be some means of taking
up or cushioning this difference, the operation of the pump would be
irregular during the stroke and productive of water-hammer or blows to
the engine. Two means are employed to remove this undesirable effect,
i.e., the fly-wheel and the air-chamber, or both. In the one case the
excess of work performed by the steam in the early part of the stroke
is stored up as energy in the accelerated motion of the fly-wheel and
given out by the latter near the end of the stroke, thus producing the
desired equalization. The air-chamber is a large reservoir containing
air, attached to and freely communicating with the force-main or pipe
near its connection with the pumps. In this case the excess of work
performed at the beginning of the stroke is used in compressing the
air in the air-chamber, sufficient water entering to accomplish that
purpose. This compressed air acts as a cushion, expanding again at the
end of the stroke and reinforcing the decreasing effort of the steam.

=196. Resistances of Pumps and Main—Dynamic Head.=—Obviously the
water flowing through the pipes, pump-cylinders, and pump-valves
will experience some resistance, and it is one purpose in good
pumping-engine design to make the progress of the water through the
pump so direct and free as to reduce these losses to a minimum.
Similarly the large pipe or main, called the force-main, leading
from the pump up to the reservoir into which the water is delivered,
sometimes several thousand feet long, will afford a resistance of
friction to the water flowing through it. The head which measures
this frictional loss is given by equation (10) on page 239. All these
resistances will increase rapidly with the velocity with which the
water flows through the pipes and other passages, as do all hydraulic
losses. It is obviously advisable, therefore, to make this velocity
as low as practicable without unduly increasing the diameter of the
force-main. This velocity seldom exceeds about 3 feet per second.

[Illustration: Allis Pump.]

[Illustration: Section of Allis Pumping-Engine.]

The static head against which the pumping-engine operates is the
vertical height or elevation between the water surfaces in the
pump-well and the reservoir. The head which represents the resistances
of the passages through the pump and force-main, when added to the sum
of the static head and the head due to the velocity in the force-main,
gives what is called the dynamic head; it represents the total head
against which the pump acts. If _h_ represents the static head, _hʹ_
the head due to all the resistances, and _h″_ the head due to the
velocity in the force-main, then the dynamic head will be

                                    _l   v²        v²    v²_
    _H_ = _h + hʹ + h″_ = _h_ + _f_ --- ---- + _n_---- + ----,
                                    _d_ 2_g_       2_g_  2_g_

in which _f_ has a value of about .015 and _n_ is a coefficient which
when multiplied by the velocity head will represent the loss of head
incurred by the water in passing through the pump-cylinder and valves.
The latter quantity is variable in value; but it is seldom more than a
few feet.

=197. Duty of Pumping-engines.=—It is thus seen that the collective
machines and force-main forming the pumping system afford opportunity
for a number of serious losses of energy found chiefly in the boiler,
the engine, and the pump. The excellence of a pumping-plant, including
the boilers, may obviously be measured by the amount of useful work
performed by a standard quantity, as 100 pounds of coal. Sixty or more
years ago, in the days of the old Cornish pumping-engine, the standard
of excellence or “duty” was the number of foot-pounds of work, i.e.,
the number of pounds lifted one foot high, performed by one bushel of
coal. As early as 1843 the Cornish pumping-engine reached a duty, per
bushel of coal, of 107,500,000 foot-pounds. These pumping-engines were
single-acting, the steam raising a weight the descent of which forced
the water up the delivery-pipe.

At a later date and until about ten years ago the usual standard or
criterion applied to pumping-engines for city water-works was the
amount of work performed in lifting water for each 100 pounds of
coal consumed; this result was also called the “duty” of the engine.
In order to determine the duty of a pumping-engine it was thus only
necessary to observe carefully for a given period of time, i.e.,
twenty-four hours or some other arbitrary period, the amount of coal
consumed, the condition of the furnace-fires at the beginning and end
of the test being as nearly the same as possible, and measure at the
same time the total amount of water discharged into the reservoir.
The total weight of water raised multiplied by the total number of
feet of elevation from the water surface in the pump-well to that in
the reservoir would give the total number of foot-pounds of useful
work performed. This quantity divided by the number of hundred pounds
of coal consumed would then give what is called the “duty” of the
pumping-engine.

=198. Data to be Observed in Pumping-engine Tests.=—Obviously it is
necessary to observe a considerable number of data with care. No
pump works with absolute perfection. A little water will run back
through the valves before they are seated, and there will be a little
leakage either through the valves or through the packing around the
piston or plunger, or both sources of leakage may exist. That leakage
and back-flow represent the amount of slip or water which escapes
to the back of the plunger after having been in front of it. In
well-constructed machinery this slip or leakage is now very small and
may be but a small fraction of one per cent. Inasmuch as the amount
of work performed by the steam will be the same whether this slip
or leakage exists or not, the latter is now frequently ignored in
estimating the duty of pumping-engines, the displacement of the piston
or plunger itself being taken as the volume of water pumped at each
stroke.

Again, in discussing the efficiency of the steam portion of the
machinery the amount of partial vacuum maintained in the vacuum-pump,
which is used to move the water of the condensed steam, is affected
by atmospheric pressure, as is the work which is performed. Hence
in complete engine tests it is necessary to observe the height of
the barometer during the test. It is also necessary to observe the
temperature of feed-water supplied to the boiler, and to use accurate
appliances for ascertaining with the greatest exactness practicable
the weight of dry steam used in the steam-cylinders and the amount of
water which it carries. It is not necessary for the present purpose
to discuss with minuteness these details, but it is evident from the
preceding observations that the complete test of a pumping-engine
involves the accurate observation of many data and their careful use in
computations. The determination of the duty alone is but a simple part
of those computations, and the duty is all that is now in question.

=199. Basis of Computations for Duty.=—It was formerly necessary in
giving the duty of a pumping-engine to state whether the 100 pounds of
coal was actually coal as shovelled into the furnace, or whether it was
that coal less the weight of ash remaining after combustion. It was
also necessary to specify the quality of coal used, because the heating
capacity of different coals may vary materially. For these different
reasons the statement of the duty of a pumping-engine in terms of a
given weight of coal consumed involved considerable uncertainty, hence
in 1891 a committee of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
appointed for the purpose, took into consideration the best method
of determining and stating the duty of a pumping-engine. The report
of that committee may be found in vol. XII of the Transactions of
that Society. The committee recommended that in a duty test 1,000,000
heat-units (called British Thermal Units or, as abbreviated, frequently
B.T.U.) should be substituted for 100 pounds of coal. In other words,
that the following should be the expression for the duty:

                 foot-pounds of work done
    Duty = ----------------------------------- × 1,000,000.
           total number of heat-units consumed

For some grades of coal in which 1,000,000 heat-units would be
available for every 100 pounds the numerical value of the duty
expressed in the new terms would be unchanged, but for other grades of
coal the new expression of the duty might be considerably different.

=200. Heat-units and Ash in 100 Pounds of Coal, and Amount of Work
Equivalent to a Heat-unit.=—The following table exhibits results
determined by Mr. George H. Barrus (Trans. A. S. M. E., vol. XIV. page
816), giving an approximate idea of the total number of heat-units
which are made available by the combustion of 100 pounds of coal of the
kinds indicated:

    Semibitumintous:
      George’s Creek Cumberland,      Percentage of Ash.
        1,287,400 to 1,421,700          6.1 to 8.6
      Pocahontas,
        1,360,800 to 1,460,300          3.2 to 6.2
      New River,
        1,385,800 to 1,392,200          3.5 to 5.7

    Bituminous:
      Youghiogheny, Pa., lump,
        1,294,100                           5.9
      Youghiogheny, Pa., slack,
        1,166,400                          10.2
      Frontenac, Kan.,
        1,050,600                          17.7
      Cape Breton Caledonia,
        1,242,000                           8.7

    Anthracite:
        1,152,100 to 1,318,900          9.1 to 10.5

[Illustration: Worthington Pump.]

Each unit or B.T.U. represents the amount of heat required to raise
one pound of water at 32° Fahr. 1° Fahr., and it is equal to 778
foot-pounds of work. In other words, 778 foot-pounds of work is said
to be the mechanical equivalent of one heat-unit. The amount of work,
therefore, which one pound of dry steam is capable of performing at
any given pressure and at the corresponding temperature may readily
be found by multiplying the number of available heat-units which it
contains, and which may be readily computed if not already known, by
778, or as in a pumping-engine duty trial, knowing by observation the
number of pounds of steam at a given pressure and temperature supplied
through the steam-cylinders, the number of heat-units supplied in
that steam is at once known or may easily be computed. Then observing
or computing the total weight of water raised by the pumping-engine,
as well as the total head (the dynamic head) against which the
pumping-engine has worked, the total number of foot-pounds of work
performed can be at once deduced. This latter quantity divided by the
number of million heat-units will give the desired duty.

[Illustration: Section of Worthington Pump.]

=201. Three Methods of Estimating Duty.=—At the present time it is
frequently, and perhaps usually, customary to give the duty in terms
of 100 pounds of coal consumed, as well as in terms of 1,000,000
heat-units. Frequently, also, the duty is expressed in terms of 1000
pounds of dry steam containing about 1,000,000 heat-units. As has
sometimes been written, the duty unit is 100 for coal, 1000 for steam,
and 1,000,000 for heat-units.

=202. Trial Test and Duty of Allis Pumping-engine.=—The following data
are taken from a duty test of an Allis pumping-engine at Hackensack,
N. J., in 1899 by Prof. James E. Denton. This pumping-engine was built
to give a duty not less than 145,000,000 foot-pounds for each “1000
pounds of dry steam consumed by the engine, assuming the weight of
water delivered to be that of the number of cubic feet displaced by the
plungers on their inward stroke, i.e., to be 145,000,000 foot-pounds
at a steam pressure of 175 pounds gauge.” The capacity of the engine
was to be 12,000,000 gallons per twenty-four hours at a piston speed
not exceeding 217 feet per minute. The engine was of the vertical
triple-expansion type with cylinders 25.5 inches, 47 inches, and 73
inches in diameter with a stroke of 42¹/₁₆ inches, the single-acting
plunger being 25.524 inches in diameter. The following data and figures
illustrate the manner of computing the duty:

DUTY PER 1000 POUNDS OF DRY STEAM BY PLUNGER DISPLACEMENT.

    1. Circumference of plungers, _Cl_                     80.1875 ins.
    2. Length of stroke, 7                                 42.0625 ins.
    3. Number of plungers (single-acting)                   3
    4. Aggregate displacement of plunger per revolution =

         3_C²l_
         ------ = _d_                            64,4557.1 cu. ins.
           4π

    5. Revolutions during 24 hours, _N_          43,337
    6. Weight of one cubic foot of water, _w_        62.42 lbs.
    7. Total head pumped against, _H_               266.61 ft.
    8. Total feed-water per 24 hours, _W_       160,354 lbs.
    9. Duty per 1000 lbs. of feed-water =

     _d × w   H × N_ × 1000
     ------ × -------------
      1728        _W_

                     266.61 × 43,337 × 1000
       = 2,331,976 × ---------------------- = 168,027,200 ft.-lbs.
                          160,354

    10. Percentage of moisture in steam at
        engine-throttle valve                  0.3 per cent.

                                         168,027,200
    11. Duty per 1000 lbs. of dry steam, ----------- = 168,532,800
                                            0.997         ft.-lbs.

DUTY PER MILLION HEAT-UNITS.

    12. Average steam pressure at throttle above atmosphere. 173 lbs.
    13. Average feed-water temperature.                  78°.5 Fahr.
    14. Total heat in one pound of steam containing
           0.3 per cent. of moisture above 32° Fahr.   1,194.2 B. T. U.
    15. Heat per lb. of feed-water above 32° Fahr.        46.5    ”
                                                       -------
    16. Heat supplied per lb. of feed-water
        above 32° Fahr.                                1,147.7    ”
    17. Duty per lb. of feed-water.                  168,027.2 ft.-lbs.
    18. Duty per million B. T. U.                    146,403,614  ”

=203. Conditions Affecting Duty of Pumping-engines.=—Manifestly the
duty of a pumping-engine by whatever standard it may be measured will
vary with the conditions under which it is made. A new engine running
under the favoring circumstances of a short-time test may be expected
to give a higher duty than when running under the ordinary conditions
of usage one month after another. Hence it can scarcely be expected
that the monthly performance, and much less the yearly performance, of
an engine will show as high results as when tested for a day or two or
for less time.

=204. Speeds and Duties of Modern Pumping-engines.=—The following table
gives the piston or plunger speeds of a number of the best modern
pumping-engines, and the corresponding duties, with the standards by
which those duties are measured.

    LEGEND:
         (A) = Piston Speed in Feet per Minute.
         (B) = Duty in Foot-pounds.
    -------------------------------+------+-----------+-----------------
                Engine.            | (A)  |    (B)    | Expressed in
    -------------------------------+------+-----------+-----------------
    Ridgewood Station, Brooklyn,   |      |           |
      Worthington engine           |164.0 |137,953,585| 1000 lbs. of
                                   |      |           |    dry steam
    14th St. pumping-station,      |      |           |
      Chicago; built by Lake Erie  |      |           |
      Engine Works                 |210.54|133,445,000| Million B.T.U.
    Allis engine at Hackensack,    |      |           |
      N. J.                        |210.65|146,403,416|    ”       ”
    Snow pump at Indianapolis      |214.6 |150,100,000|    ”       ”
    Leavitt pump at Chestnut Hill  |      |144,499,032|    ”       ”
    Nordberg at Wildwood           |256.0 |162,132,517|    ”       ”
    Allis at Chestnut Hill, tested |      |           |
      May 1, 1900                  |192.5 |157,002,500| Million B.T.U.
    Allis at St. Louis, tested     |      |           |
      February 26, 1900            |197.16|158,077,324|    ”       ”
    Barr at Waltham, Mass.         |194.28|128,865,000| 1000 lbs. of
                                   |      |           |    dry steam
    Allis at St. Paul, Minn.       |189.0 |144,463,000|   ”   ”    ”
    Lake Erie Engine Works at      |      |           |
      Buffalo                      |207.7 |135,403,745| Million B.T.U.

These results show that material advances have been made in
pumping-engine designs within a comparatively few years.




CHAPTER XIX.


=205. Distributing-reservoirs and their Capacities.=—The water of a
public supply seldom runs from the storage-reservoir directly into
the distributing system or is pumped directly into it, although such
practices may in some cases be permissible for small towns or cities.
Generally distributing-reservoirs are provided either in or immediately
adjacent to the distributing system of pipes, meaning the water-pipes
large and small which are laid through the streets of a city or town,
and the service-pipes leading from the latter directly to the consumers.

The capacity ordinarily given to these distributing-reservoirs is not
controlled by any rigid rule, but depends upon the local circumstances
of each case. If they are of masonry and covered with masonry arches,
as required for the reception of some filtered waters, they are made as
small as practicable on account of their costs. If, on the contrary,
they are open and formed of suitably constructed embankments, like the
distributing-reservoirs of New York City in Central Park and at High
Bridge, they are and should be of much greater capacity. The storage
volume of the High Bridge reservoir amounts to 11,000,000 gallons,
while that of the Central Park reservoir is 1,000,000,000 gallons.
Again, the capacity of the old receiving-basin in Central Park is
200,000,000 gallons. These reservoirs act also as equalizers against
the varying draft on the system during the different portions of the
day and furnish all desired storage for the demands of fire-streams,
which, while it lasts, may be a demand at a high rate. It may be
approximately stated under ordinary circumstances that the capacity of
distributing-reservoirs for a given system should equal from two or
three to eight or ten days supply. It is advantageous to approach the
upper of those limits when practicable. The volume of water retained in
these reservoirs acts in some cases as a needed storage, while repairs
of pumping-machinery or other exigencies may temporarily stop the flow
into them. The larger their capacity the more effectively will such
exigencies be met.

=206. System of Distributing Mains and Pipes.=—Gate-houses must be
placed at the distributing-reservoirs within which are found and
operated the requisite gates controlling the supply into the reservoir
and the outflow from it into the distributing system. The latter
begins at the distributing-reservoir where there may be one or two
or more large mains, usually of cast-iron. These mains conduct the
water into the branching system of pipes which forms a network over
the entire city or town. A few lines of large pipes are laid so as
to divide the total area to be supplied into convenient portions
served by pipes of smaller diameter leading from the larger, so that
practically every street shall carry its line or lines of piping from
which every resident or user may draw the desired supply. Obviously,
as a rule, the further the beginning of the distributing system is
departed from in following out the ramifications of the various lines
the smaller will the diameter of pipe become. The smallest cast-iron
pipe of a distributing system is seldom less than 3 inches, and
sometimes not less than 4 or 6 inches. There should be no dead ends
in any distributing system. By a dead end is meant the end of a line
of pipes, which is closed so that no water circulates through it.
Whenever a branch pipe ceases it should be extended so as to connect
with some other pipe in the system in order to induce circulation. The
entire distributing system should therefore, in its extreme as well
as central portions, constitute an interlaced system and not a series
of closed ends. This is essential for the purity and potability of
the water-supply. A circulation in all parts of the entire system is
essential and it should be everywhere secured.

The diagram shows a portion of the distributing system of the city of
New York. It will be noticed that there is a complete connection of
the outlying portions, so as to make the interlacing and corresponding
circulation as complete and active as possible.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.—New York City Distributing System.]

=207. Diameters of and Velocities in Distributing Mains and Pipes.=—In
laying out a distributing system it will not be possible to base the
diameters at different points on close computations for velocity or
discharges based upon considerations of friction or other resistances,
as the conditions under which the pipes are found are too complicated
to make such a method workable. Approximate estimates may be made as
to the number of consumers to be supplied at a given section of a main
pipe, and consequently what the diameter should be to pass the required
daily supply so that the velocity may not exceed certain maximum limits
known to be advisable. Such estimates may be made at a considerable
number of what may be termed critical points of the system, and the
diameters may be ascertained in that manner with sufficient accuracy.
In this field of hydraulics a sound engineering judgment, based upon
experience, is a very important element, as it is in a great many other
engineering operations.

It will follow from these considerations that as a rule the larger
diameters of pipe in a given distributing system will belong to the
greater lengths, and it will be found that the velocities of water in
the various parts of a system will seldom exceed the following limits,
which, although stated with some precision, are to be regarded only as
approximate:

    For  4-inch pipe   23 feet per second.
     ”   6  ”    ”     23  ”    ”     ”
     ”   8  ”    ”     17  ”    ”     ”
     ”  11  ”    ”     12  ”    ”     ”
     ”  12  ”    ”     12  ”    ”     ”
     ”  16  ”    ”      9  ”    ”     ”
     ”  20  ”    ”      8  ”    ”     ”
     ”  24  ”    ”      7  ”    ”     ”
     ”  30  ”    ”      7  ”    ”     ”
     ”  36  ”    ”      7  ”    ”     ”
     ”  48  ”    ”      7  ”    ”     ”
     ”  60  ”    ”      7  ”    ”     ”

=208. Required Pressures in Mains and Pipes.=—In designing distributing
systems it is very essential so to apportion the pipes as to secure
the requisite pressure at the various street services. Like many other
features of a water-supply system no exact rules can be given, but it
may be stated that at the street-level a pressure of at least 20 to 30
pounds should be found in resident districts, and from 30 to 35 or 40
pounds in business districts. The character and height of buildings
affect these pressures to a large extent. Old pipe systems usually
have many weak points, and while pressures requisite to carry water
to the top of three- or four-story buildings are needed, any great
excess above that would be apt to cause breaks and result in serious
leakages. If the distributing system is one in which the pressure for
fire-streams is to be found at the hydrants, then greater pressures
than those named must be provided. In such cases the pressures in pipes
at the hydrants should range from 60 to 100 pounds.

=209. Fire-hydrants.=—Fire-hydrants must be placed usually at street
corners, if the blocks are not too long, and so distributed as to
control with facility the entire district in which they are found.
Unless fire-engines are used to create their own pressure, the lower
the pressure at the hydrant the nearer together the hydrants must be
placed. It is obvious, however, that when the pressure of the system
is depended upon for fire-streams it is desirable to have the pressure
comparatively high, so far as the hydrants are concerned, as under
those conditions they may be placed farther apart and a less number
will be required.

=210. Elements of Distributing Systems.=—The following table gives
a number of statistics, exhibiting the elements of the distributing
system of a considerable number of cities, including some pumping and
meter data pertinent to the costs of pumping on the one hand and the
extension of the use of meters on the other.

It contains information of no little practical value in connection
with the administration of the distributing systems and the
consumption of water in it. This table has been compiled by Mr.
Chas. W. Sherman of the New England Water-works Association, and
was published in the proceedings of that association for September,
1901. The service-pipes, varying from ½ to 10 inches in diameter,
are of cast-iron, wrought-iron, lead, galvanized iron, tin-lined,
rubber-lined, cement-lined, enamelled and tarred, the practice varying
widely not only from one city to another, but in the same city.

TABLE XIX

    LEGEND:
       (A) = Kind of Pipe.
       (B) = Size of Pipe. Ins
       (C) = Total Length in Use, Miles.
       (D) = Cost of Repairs per Mile.
       (E) = Total Number of Hydrants in Use.
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
      Name of City or Town.    |  (A)   | (B) |  (C) | (D)  |   (E)
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Albany, N. Y.              |        |     | 129.7|      |   808
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Atlantic City, N. J.       |  C.I.  | 4-20|  47.6|      |   519
                               |        |     |      |      |   808
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Boston, Mass.              |  C.I.  | 2-48| 713.4| 27.09|  7606
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
                               |  C.L.  |     |      |      |
    Burlington, Vt.            |  C.I.  | 4-30|  38.0|  4.61|   213
                               |  W.I.  |     |      |      |
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Cambridge, Mass.           |        |     |      |      |   968
                               |        |     |      |      |
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Chelsea, Mass.             |  C.I.  | 6-16|  37.8|      |   253
                               |        |     |      |      |
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
                               |  C.I.  |     |      |      |
    Concord, N. H.             |  C.L.  | 4-30|  60.2|      |   267
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Fall River, Mass.          |  C.I.  | 6-24|  87.3|      |   954
                               |        |     |      |      |
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Fitchburg, Mass.           |  C.I.  | 2-20|  66.6|      |   499
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
                               |  C.I.  |     |      |      |
    Holyoke, Mass.             |  W.I.  | ½-30|  81.6|  5.14|   860
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Lowell, Mass.              |        |     | 127.8|      |  1098
                               |        |     |      |      |
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
                               |  W.I.  |     |      |      |
    Lynn, Mass.                |  C.L.  | 2-20| 129.4|      |   952
                               |  C.I.  |     |      |      |
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Madison, Wis.              |  C.I.  | 4-16|  34.3|      |   169
                               |        |     |      |      |
                               |        |     |      |      |
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
                               |  C.L.  |     |      |      |
    Manchester, N. H.          |  C.I.  | 4-20|  96.9|      |   743
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
                 Owned by      |  C.I.  | 6-60|  69.8|      |
    Metropolitan               |  C.L.  |     |      |      |
     Water-works               +--------+-----+------+------+----------
                               |  C.I.  |     |      |      |
                 Tot. Sup. by  |  C.L.  | 4-60|1360.3|      | 11913
                               |  Kal.  |     |      |      |
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
                               |  C.I.  |     |      |      |
    Minneapolis, Minn.         |  Steel.|1¼-50| 269.2|      |  3172
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    New Bedford, Mass.         |  C.I.  | 4-36|  92.7| 24.00|   738
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
                               |  W.I.  |     |      |      |
    New London, Conn.          |  C.L.  | 4-24|  50.5| 18.71|   258
                               |  C.I.  |     |      |      |
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Newton, Mass.              |  C.I.  | 4-20| 136.6|  6.43|   935
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Providence, R. I.          |  C.I.  | 6-36| 324.6|  0.56|  1886
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
         ”    H.P. Fire System |  C.I.  |12-24|   5.6|      |    92
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
                               |  W.I.  |     |      |      |
    Quincy, Mass.              |  C.I.  | 1-36| 144.7|  5.50|    955†
                               |  C.L.  |     |      |      |
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
                               |  C.I.  |     |      |      |
    Springfield, Mass.         |  Kal.  | 2-20|  84.1|      |   539
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Woonsocket, R. I.          |  C.I.  | 4-20|  45.8|  3.57|   548
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Yonkers, N. Y.             |        |     |  74.1|      |   771
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------
    Worcester, Mass.           |        | 2-40| 173.5|      |  1763
                               |        |     |      |      |
    ---------------------------+--------+-----+------+------+----------

† Public hydrants only.

TABLE XIX. (continued)

    LEGEND:
       (F) = Total Number of Gates in Use.
       (G) = Range of Pressure on Mains at Centre, Pounds.
       (H) = Size of Service-pipe in Inches.
       (I) = Total Number of Service-taps in Use.
       (J) = Total Number of Meters in Use.
       (K) = Total Pumpage for the Year in Gallons.
       (L) = Average Static Head against which Pumps Work, Feet.
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
     (F)|    (G)       |  (H) |  (I)  |   (J)  |      (K)        |  (L)
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
     803|              |      |       |   2030 |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
        |              |  ½-4 |  4,249|   3298 |   955,726,046   |  81.7
        |              |      |       |        |   148,662,947   | 119.5
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
    8910|   40-90      |  ½-8 | 87,525|   4516 |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
     618|   70-85      |  ½-6 |  3,350|   2311 |   312,896,525   | 289
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
        |              |      | 14,207|    860 | 2,651,277,240   |
     399|   48-50      |  ⅝-2 |  6,146|    104 |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
     757|              |      |  3,340|   1010 |   142,772,165   |
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
     940|     80       |  ½-2 |  6,943|  6,544 | 1,388,776,336   | 186.2
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
        |     75 L.S.  |      |       |        |                 |
     554|    155 H.S.  |  ¾-8 |  4,432|  2,427 |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
     734|  80-100      |  ⅝-4 |  3,610|    210 |                 |
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
    1188|              |      | 10,634|  5,586 | 2,042,066,140   | 156.1
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
        |              |      |       |        |   378,782,675   |
     966|  45-60       |  ¾-4 | 13,504|  2,571 | 1,330,784,875   |
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
     234|              |      |  2,758|  2,586 |   306,637,454   | 223.8
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+-----
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
     910|              |  ½-6 |  5,513|  3,667 |                 |
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
     268|              |      |134,496| 10,385 |15,027,410,000(a)|
        |              |      |       |        | 9,431,140,000(b)|
        |              |      |       |        | 2,015,130,000(c)|
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
    2195|              |  ⅝-1 | 20,064|  5,030 | 6,863,135,200   |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
    1065|  28-64       |  ½-10|  9,280|  1,429 | 2,307,429,372   | 167.2
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
     318|  40-48       |  ½-4 |  3,088|    229 |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
     801|    84        |  ½-6 |  7,087|  6,001 |   762,876,073   | 234
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
    3399|  64-73       |  ½-10| 21,566| 17,813 | 3,833,243,445   | 171.6
        |              |      |       |        |    34,401,038   | 172.4
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
      31|   114        |      |       |        |   578,940,480   | 111.2
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
    1889| 30-35 H.S.   |  1-6 |  9,764|  3,122 |                 |
        | 100-120 L.S.†|      |       |        |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
    1001| 78-85        |  ⅝-3 |  4,330|    122 |                 |
        |              |      |       |        |                 |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
     456| 50-120       |  ⅝-6 |  2,193|  1,889 |   340,849,628   | 237.6
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
     498|              |  ¼-8 |  4,968|  4,852 | 1,323,696,099   |
    ----+--------------+------+-------+--------+-----------------+------
        |   70 L.S.    |      |       |        |                 |
    2432|  150 H.S.†   |      | 13,292| 12,529 |                 |

† Public hydrants only.

    C.L. = cement-lined.
    (_a_) = Chestnut Hill high service.
    (_b_) = Chestnut Hill low service.
    (_c_) = Spot Pond Pumping-station.

TABLE XIX. (continued)

    LEGEND:
       (M) = Average Dynamic Head against which Pumps Work, Feet.
       (N) = Duty in Foot-pounds per 100 Pounds of Coal. No Deductions.
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
                                |        |       |       |
                                |        |       |       |
       Name of City or Town.    |Kind of |Size of|  (M)  |  (N)
                                |  Pipe. | Pipe. |       |
                                |        |       |       |
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
    Albany, N. Y.               |   ..   |  ..   |   ..  |     ..
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
    Atlantic City, N. J.        |  C.I.  | 4-20  |  123.3|  36,501,217
                                |        |       |  119.5|  15,518,455
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
    Boston, Mass.               |  C.I.  | 2-48  |   ..  |     ..
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
                                |  C.L.  |       |       |
    Burlington, Vt.             |  C.I.  | 4-30  |  316  |     ..
                                |  W.I.  |       |       |
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
    Cambridge, Mass.            |   ..   |  ..   |   ..  |     ..
    Chelsea, Mass.              |  C.I.  | 6-16  |   ..  |     ..
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
    Concord, N. H.              |  C.I.  |       |       |
                                |  C.L.  | 4-30  |   ..  |     ..
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
    Fall River, Mass.           |  C.I.  | 6-24  |   ..  |     ..
    Fitchburg, Mass.            |  C.I.  | 2-20  |   ..  |     ..
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
    Holyoke, Mass.              |  C.I.  | ½-30  |   ..  |     ..
                                |  W.I.  |       |       |
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
    Lowell, Mass.               |   ..   |  ..   |  163.9|  93,489,048
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
                                |  W.I.  |       |       |
    Lynn, Mass.                 |  C.L.  | 2-20  |  167  |  88,780,036
                                |  C.I.  |       |  167  |  87,265,319
    Madison, Wis.               |  C.I.  | 4-16  |  242.4|  47,530,839
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
    Manchester, N. H.           |  C.L.  | 4-20  |   ..  |     ..
                                |  C.I.  |       |       |
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
                                |  C.I.  | 6-60  |   96.5| 121,800,000
                   Owned by     |  C.L.  |       |       |
    Metropolitan                +--------+-------+-------+------------
    Water-works                 |  C.I.  | 4-60  |   51.8| 109,380,000
                   Tot. Sup. by |  C.L.  |       |  125.6|  80,400,000
                                |  Kal.  |       |       |
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
                                |  C.I.  |       |       |
    Minneapolis, Minn.          |  Steel.| 1½-50 |  ..   |  68,016,609
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
    New Bedford, Mass.          |  C.I.  | 4-36  |  192  | 130,336,508
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
                                |  W.I.  |       |       |
    New London, Conn.           |  C.L.  | 4-24  |   ..  |     ..
                                |  C.I.  |       |       |
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
    Newton, Mass.               |  C.I.  | 4-20  |  254  |  72,500,000
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
                                |        |       |  176.9| 101,301,600
    Providence, R. I.           |  C.I.  | 6-36  |  177.7|  60,329,100
                                |        |       |  124.7|  68,533,300
        ”  H.P. Fire System     |  C.I.  |12-24  |   ..  |     ..
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
    Quincy, Mass.               |  C.I.  |       |       |
                                |  Kal.  | 2-20  |   ..  |     ..
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
                                |  W.I.  |       |       |
    Springfield, Mass.          |  C.I.  | 1-36  |   ..  |     ..
                                |  C.L.  |       |       |
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------
    Woonsocket, R. I.           |  C.I.  | 4-20  |  239.5|  51,024,641
    Yonkers, N. Y.              |   ..   |  ..   |   ..  |     ..
    Worcester, Mass.            |   ..   | 2-40  |   ..  |     ..
    ----------------------------+--------+-------+-------+------------

TABLE XIX. (continued)

    LEGEND:
       (O) = Cost per Million Gallons raised 1 Foot High.
             Pumping-station Expenses.
       (P) = Cost per Million Gallons raised 1 Foot High.
             Figured on Total Maintenance.
       (R) = Rate of Interest Per Cent.
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
          |             | Net Cost of |  Bonded  |   Value of  |
     (O)  |     (P)     |     Works   |   Debt   |   Sinking   |  (R)
          |             |   to Date.  | at Date. |Fund at Date.|
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |      $0.264 |  $916,723.59|  $892,000|  $100,407.01|  4½-5
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |       ..    |23,054,387.81|11,960,272|10,144,647.08|  3½-6
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
    0.08  |       0.366 |   468,039.73|   248,000|    64,076.40|  3½-4
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |       ..    | 5,670,229.52| 3,302,100|   604,326.58|
          |             |             |          |             |
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |       ..    |   483,335.52|   300,000|       50,921|
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |       ..    |   857,440.98|   650,000|             |
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |       ..    | 1,937,862.93| 1,920,000|   581,647.78|  5.1
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |       ..    |   452,091.09|   648,000|   195,908.91|
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |       ..    | 1,244,742.23|   300,000|    37,403.46|  4
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
    0.0399|       ..    |      ..     | 1,274,700|   287,226.20|
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
    0.042 |       0.51  | 2,472,821.85| 1,800,300|   524,027.50|  3½-5
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
    0.159 |       ..    |   337,630.13|          |             |
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |       ..    | 1,513.012.79|   900,000|   159,466.83|  4-6
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
    0.0314|             |             |          |             |
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
          |             |             |          |             |
          |             |             |          |             |
    0.032 |             |             |          |             |
          |             |             |          |             |
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
    0.043 |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
    0.033 |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
    0.0259|       0.2867| 1,820,107.73|   558,000|   148,793.77|av. 4.44
          |             |             |          |             |
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |       ..    |   706,978.44|   410,000|      ..     |  3.5-4
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
    0.05  |       0.59  | 2,034,808.07| 2,075,000|   849,115.40| av. 4.7
          |             |             |          |             |
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |L.S. = 0.0259| 6,470,093.35| 5,920,000|   713,431.62| av. 3.7
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |H.S. = 0.1134|             |          |             |
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |        ..   |      ..     |   720,500|      ..     |  4
          |             |             |          |             |
          |             |             |          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |        ..   | 2,128,559.56| 1,500,000|   461,861.90| av. 5.9
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
    0.061 |       0.37  |   390,841.78|          |             |
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+--------
      ..  |         ..  | 1,577,105.15| 1,475,000|   310,700   |  3.5-7
    ------+-------------+-------------+----------+-------------+---------




CHAPTER XX.


=211. Sanitary Improvement of Public Water-supplies.=—In the preceding
consideration of a public water-supply it has been virtually assumed
that the water will reach consumers in the proper sanitary condition;
but this is not always the case. With great increase of population
and corresponding increase of manufacturing and other industries
there arise many sources of contamination, so that pure spring- or
river-water for public supplies becomes less available and at the
present time in this country it is rarely to be had.

The legal responsibility of parties who allow sewage, manufacturing
wastes, or other contaminating matter to flow into streams is already
clearly recognized, and many cities and towns are required to dispose
of their sewage and other wastes in such manner as to avoid polluting
streams of water flowing past sewer outfalls or manufacturing
establishments; but even these restraints are not sufficient. If a
stream has once been polluted it can scarcely be considered safe as
a supply for potable water for public or private purposes. There are
certain diseases whose bacilli are water-borne and which are conveyed
by drinking-water containing them; prominent among such diseases are
typhoid fever and cholera. Experience has many times shown that these
bacilli or disease germs may find their way from isolated country
houses as well as from the sewage of cities into water that would
otherwise be potable. Besides such considerations as these it is
equally well known from engineering experience that many waters of
otherwise fair quality carry the remains of organic matter in one shape
or another which operate prejudicially to the physical condition of
those who drink such water. It is therefore becoming more and more
the conviction of civil engineers and sanitarians that there are
few sources of potable water so free from some degree of pollution
that the supplies drawn from them do not require treatment in order
to put them into good condition for drinking. It is not intended in
this observation to state that there are no streams or springs from
which natural waters may not be immediately used for domestic purposes
without improving them by artificial means, but it may be stated even
at the present time that no water of a public water-supply should
be used without treatment, unless the most thorough bacteriological
examinations show that its sanitary condition is eminently satisfactory.

It is the common experience of many public water-supplies in this
country that during certain seasons of the year, extending through the
summer and autumn months, certain low forms of vegetation flourish,
causing sometimes discoloration and always offensive tastes and odors.
While such waters are usually not dangerous, they certainly are not
desirable and may cause the human system to become receptive in respect
to pathogenic bacilli. The tendency at the present time, therefore,
is to consider the improvement of any water-supply that may be
contemplated for any city or town.

=212. Improvement by Sedimentation.=—The two broad methods of improving
the water of a public supply at the present time are sedimentation and
filtration, the latter generally through clean sand, although sometimes
other fine granular material or porous mass is used. The operation of
sedimentation is carried on when water is allowed to stand absolutely
at rest or to move through a series of basins with such small velocity
that the greater portion of the solid material held in suspension is
given an opportunity to settle to the bottom. All water which is taken
from natural sources, whether surface or underground, carries some
solid matter. Some waters, like spring-water or from an underground
supply, are so clear as to be very nearly free from solid matter in
suspension, but, on the other hand, there are waters, like those from
silt-bearing rivers, which carry large amounts. Observations upon the
Mississippi River at St. Louis have shown that the suspended matter
may reach as much as 1000 parts in one million, although the quantity
held in suspension is usually much less than that. Similar observations
have been made upon other silt-bearing streams. Such large proportions
of suspended solid matter are not usually found in streams used for
potable purposes, but there are few surface sources of water-supply
the water from which will not be sensibly improved by sedimentation in
settling-basins or reservoirs.

The process of sedimentation is usually preliminary to that of
filtration. If raw water, i.e., as it comes from its natural source,
is conducted directly to filtration-beds, the amount of solid matter
is frequently so great that the surface of the filter would be too
quickly clogged; hence it is advisable in almost every case to subject
to sedimentation any water which is designed to be treated subsequently
by filtration.

The degree of turbidity is usually measured by means similar to those
employed in gauging discoloration from vegetable matter. One method
devised by Mr. Allen Hazen, to which allusion will again be made, is
that in which the depth in inches is observed at which a platinum wire
1 mm. in diameter and 1 inch long can be seen. The degree of turbidity
is then represented by the reciprocal of that distance. The permissible
turbidity estimated in this manner is taken by different authorities
at different values running from .025 to .2. Water of this degree of
turbidity appears, when seen through a glass, to be practically clear.

The rapidity with which sedimentation can be performed depends greatly
upon the character and degree of comminution of the solid material.
If it is coarse, comparatively speaking, it will quickly fall to the
bottom; if the solid matter is clay of fine texture, it is dissipated
through the water in an excessively high degree of diffusion and
will remain obstinately suspended. This has been found to be the
case at some points with the Ohio River water. Ordinarily sufficient
sedimentation can be accomplished where the water remains at rest
from twenty-four to forty-eight hours; in general, observations as
to this matter, however, must be applied very cautiously. Water of
the Mississippi River at St. Louis has been found to deposit nearly
all of its sediment within twenty-four hours. At Cincinnati, on the
other hand, the Ohio River water carries so fine a sediment that on
an average not more than 75 per cent of it will be deposited in three
days by unaided subsidence. Again, at Omaha the water of the Missouri
River has been found to be turbid at the end of seventy-two hours.
In some cases, as with the waters of the Delaware and Schuylkill at
Philadelphia, a greater amount of subsidence has been found to exist at
times at the end of twenty-four hours than after forty-eight hours. It
is obvious that some special conditions must have produced such results
that would not ordinarily occur in connection with the operation of
sedimentation.

=213. Sedimentation Aided by Chemicals.=—In cases where simple
unaided subsidence proceeds too slowly it can be accelerated by the
introduction of suitable chemicals. At Cincinnati, for instance, it
was found advantageous to introduce into the water before flowing into
the settling-basins a small amount of alum or sulphate of alumina,
depending upon the degree of turbidity, the average being about 1.6
grains per gallon, rising to perhaps 4 grains in floods. By these
means a few hours of aided sedimentation would produce more subsidence
than could be obtained in several days without the chemicals. A
similar recommendation has been made for the purpose of improving the
water-supply for the city of Washington, D. C., from the Potomac River.
In other cases between 5 and 6 grains of lime per gallon have produced
effective results.

=214. Amount of Solid Matter Removed by Sedimentation.=—Under adverse
conditions, or with sediment which remains obstinately suspended, not
more than 25 to 50 per cent of the solid material will be removed
by sedimentation, but when the process is working satisfactorily,
sometimes by the aid of chemicals acting as coagulants, 90 to 99 per
cent even of the solid material may be removed. The operation of
sedimentation has another beneficial effect in that the solid matter
when being deposited carries down with it large numbers of bacteria,
which, in some cases, have been observed to be 80 or 90 per cent of
the total contents of the water. In other words, the subsidence of the
solid matter clears the water of a large portion of the bacteria.

=215. Two Methods of Operating Sedimentation-basins.=—Sedimentation
is carried on in two ways, one being the “fill-and-draw” method and
the other the “continuous” method. In the former method a basin or
reservoir is first filled with water and then allowed to stand while
the subsidence goes on for perhaps twenty-four hours. The clear water
is then drawn off, after which the reservoir is again filled. In the
continuous method, on the other hand, water is allowed to flow into
a single reservoir or series of reservoirs through which it passes
at an extremely low velocity, so that its contents will not entirely
change within perhaps twenty-four hours or more. In this method the
clear water is continuously discharging at a comparatively low rate,
the velocity in the reservoir being so small that the solid matter may
be deposited as in the fill-and-draw method. Both of these methods
are used, and both are effective. The choice will be dependent upon
local conditions. In the continuous method the solid matter is largely
deposited nearer the point of entrance into the reservoir, but more
generally over the bottom in the fill-and-draw method. The velocity
of flow in the reservoirs of the continuous method generally ranges
between 0.5 inch and 2.5 inches per minute. Occasionally the velocity
may be slightly less than the least of these values, and sometimes one
or two inches more than the maximum value.

=216. Sizes and Construction of Settling-basins.=—The sizes of the
settling-basins will obviously depend to a considerable extent upon the
daily consumption of water. There is no general rule to be followed,
but the capacity of storage volume of those actually in use run
from less than 1 to possibly 14 or 15 days’ supply. Under ordinary
circumstances their volumes may usually be taken from 5 to 6 or 8 days’
supply. Their shape should be such as to allow the greatest economy
in the construction of embankments and bottoms. They may generally
be made rectangular. Their depths is also a matter, to some extent,
of constructive economy. The depth of water will usually be found
between about 10 and 16 feet, it being supposed that possibly 2 or 3
feet of depth will be required for the collection of sediment. These
basins must be water-tight. The bottom surfaces may be covered with
concrete 6 to 9 inches thick, with water-tight firm puddle 12 to 18
inches thick underneath, resting on firm compacted earth. The inner
embankment surfaces or slopes may be paved with 10- or 12-inch riprap
resting on about 18 inches of broken stone over a layer of puddle of
equal thickness with the bottom and continuous with it. Occasionally
the bottom and sides may be simply puddled with clay and lined with
brick or riprap pavement, laid on gravel, or broken stone. It is only
necessary that the sides and bottoms shall be tight and of such degree
of hardness and continuity as to admit of thorough cleaning.

The bottoms of sedimentation-basins may advantageously not be made
level. In order to facilitate cleaning away the solid matter settling
on them, a valley or depression may be formed along the centre line to
which the two portions of the bottom slope. A grade in this channel or
central valley of 1 in 500 with slopes on either side of 1 in 200 or 1
in 300 will be effective in the disposition of the solid matter. At the
lowest end of the central valley there should be suitable gates through
which the accumulated sediment can be moved out of the basin. This
sedimentary matter will in many cases be soft mud, but its movement
will always be facilitated by the use of suitable streams of water. The
frequency of cleaning will depend upon the amount of sediment carried
by the water and upon its accumulation in the basin. Whenever its depth
ranges from 1 to 2 or 3 feet it is removed.

Complete control of the entrance of the water to and its exit from
the basin must evidently be secured by suitable gates or valves and
other appliances required for the satisfactory operation of the basin.
In some cases the cost of sedimentation-reservoirs with concrete
bottoms and sides has risen as high as $9000 per million gallons of
capacity; but where the cheaper lining has been used, as in the case
of reservoirs at Philadelphia, the range has been from about $3300 to
about $4300.

=217. Two Methods of Filtration.=—After the process of sedimentation
is completed there will necessarily always be found the remains of
organic matter and certain other polluting material which should be
removed before the water is allowed to enter the distributing system.
This removal is accomplished usually by filtration through clean sand,
but occasionally through porous material, such as concrete slabs,
porcelain, or other similar material. The latter processes are not much
used at the present time, and they will not be further considered.

The filtration of water through sand is carried on by two distinct
methods, one called slow sand filtration and the other rapid sand
filtration. In the first method the water is simply allowed to filter
slowly through beds of sand from 2 to 3 or 5 feet thick and suitably
arranged for the purpose. In the second method special appliances and
conditions are employed in such manner as to cause the water to flow
through the sand at a much more rapid rate. The method of slow sand
filtration will first receive attention.

=218. Conditions Necessary for Reduction of Organic Matter.=—The most
objectionable class of polluting materials includes organic matter
which from one source or another finds its way into natural waters.
Such material has originally constituted or formed a part of living
organisms and chemically consists of varying proportions of carbon,
oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen. As found in public water-supplies it
is usually in some stage of decomposition. The chemical operations
taking place in these decompositions are more or less complicated, but
in a general way it may be said that the first step is the oxidizing
of the carbon which may produce either carbon monoxide or carbon
dioxide and a combination of nitrogen with hydrogen as ammonia. When
the conditions are favorable, i.e., when free oxygen is present, the
ammonia may be oxidized by it, thus producing nitric acid and water.
If, as is generally the case, suitable other substances, as alkalis,
are present, the nitric acid combines with them, forming nitrates more
or less soluble and essentially innocuous. It is therefore seen that
the complete result is a chemical change from the original organic
matter, offensive and possibly dangerously polluting, to gaseous and
solid matter, the former escaping from the water and the latter either
passing off unobjectionably in a soluble state or precipitating to
the bottom as inert mineral matter. In order that these processes may
be completely effective, two or three conditions are necessary, i.e.,
sunlight, free oxygen, and certain species of that minute and low class
of organisms known as bacteria, the nature and conditions of existence
of which have been scientifically known and studied within a period
extending scarcely farther back than ten or fifteen years. The precise
nature of their operations and their relations to the presence of the
necessary oxygen, or just the parts which they play in the process of
decomposition, are not completely known, although much progress has
been made in their determination. It is positively known that their
presence and that of uncombined oxygen are essential. Certain species
of these bacteria will live and work only in the presence of sunlight
and oxygen; these are known as aerobic bacteria. Other species,
forming a class known as anaerobic bacteria, live and effect their
operations in the absence of sunlight and oxygen in that offensive
mode of decomposition which takes place in cesspools and other closed
receptacles for sewage and waste matter. They play an essential part in
what promises to be one of the most valuable methods of sewage-disposal
in which the septic tank is a main feature.

=219. Slow Filtration through Sand—Intermittent Filtration.=—In the
slow sand filtration method of purifying the water of a water-supply
the aerobic bacteria only act. In order that their operations may be
completed, free oxygen and sunlight are essential requisites, and the
first of these is found in every natural water which can be considered
potable. Any water which does not contain sufficient free oxygen for
this purpose is to be regarded with suspicion, and generally cannot be
considered suitable for domestic purposes. The amount of uncombined
oxygen contained in any potable natural water is greatly variable and
changes much with the period of exposure in a quiet state, as well
as with pressure and temperature. In the river Seine it has averaged
nearly 11 parts in a million throughout the year, being lowest in July
and August and highest in December and January. It has been found in
the experimental work of the Massachusetts State Board of Health that
free or dissolved oxygen in potable water may vary from 8.1 parts
at 80° Fahr. to 14.7 parts by weight at 32° Fahr. in 1,000,000 at
atmospheric pressure.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

[Illustration: No. 1. CROSS-SECTION AT NORTH END OF BED.]

[Illustration: No. 2. CROSS-SECTION AT BEGINNING OF PIPE UNDERDRAIN.]

[Illustration: No. 3. CROSS-SECTION AT SOUTH END OF BED.]

[Illustration: No. 4. CROSS-SECTION AT END OF LOWEST GRAVEL UNDERDRAIN.]

[Illustration: No. 5. LONGITUDINAL SECTION OF A BED, AT WESTERLY END OF
FILTER.

TYPICAL SECTIONS OF UNIT BEDS IN LAWRENCE CITY FILTER.

APRIL, 1901.

COPIED FROM PLAN FURNISHED BY A.D. MARBLE, CITY ENGINEER.]

In some cases where liability to dangerous contamination exists it may
be advisable to increase the available supply of oxygen in the water by
using a slow sand filter intermittently, as has been done at Lawrence,
Mass. Instead of permitting a continuous flow of water through the
sand, that flow is allowed for a period of 6 to 12 hours only, after
which the filter rests and is drained for perhaps an equal period.
During this intermission another filter-bed is brought into use in the
same manner. Alternating thus between two or more filters, the flow in
any one is intermittent. In this manner the oxygen of the air finds its
way into the sand voids of each drained filter in turn and thus becomes
available in the presence of suitable species of bacteria for reducing
the organic matter in the water next passing through the filter.
Intermittent filters operated in this manner are not much used, but the
most prominent instance is that at Lawrence, Mass. At that place the
water after being filtered is pumped to a higher elevation for use in
the distribution system. The pumps have been run nineteen hours out of
the twenty-four, and the water is shut off from the filters five hours
before the pumps stop. The gate admitting water to the filter is open
one hour before they start. Nine hours of each day the filter does not
receive water, and rests absolutely about four hours.

=220. Removal of Bacteria in the Filter.=—The grains of the sand at
and near the surface of a slow sand filter, within a short time after
its operation is begun, acquire a gelatinous coating, densest at the
surface and decreasing rapidly as the mass of sand is entered. This
gelatinous coating of the grains is organic in character and probably
largely made up of numerous colonies of bacteria whose presence is
necessary for the reduction of the organic matter. It is necessary
to distinguish between these species of bacteria and those which are
pathogenic and characteristic of such diseases as typhoid fever,
cholera, and others that are water-borne. Every potable surface-water
and possibly all rain-water carry bacteria which are not pathogenic and
which apparently accumulate in dense masses at and near the surface of
the slow sand filter. As the water finds its way through the sand it
loses its organic matter and its bacteria, both those of a pathogenic
and non-pathogenic character. Potable water, therefore, is purified and
rendered innocuous by the removal in the filter of all its bacteria,
including both the harmless and dangerous.

=221. Preliminary Treatment—Sizes of Sand Grains.=—In designing
filtration-works consideration must be given to the character of water
involved. There are waters which when standing in open reservoirs
exposed to the sunlight will develop disagreeable tastes and odors, and
it may be necessary to give them preliminary treatment especially for
the removal of such objectionable constituents.

The character and coarseness of the sand employed are both elements
affecting its efficiency as a filtering material. It should not
be calcareous, for then masses of it may be cemented together and
injure or partially destroy the working capacity. Again, if it is
too coarse and approaches the size of gravel, water may run freely
through it without experiencing any purification. Much labor has been
expended, especially by the State Board of Health of Massachusetts,
in investigating the characteristics of sand and the sizes of grains
best adapted to filter purposes. In that work it has become necessary
to classify sands according to degrees of fineness or coarseness.
The diameter of a grain of sand in the system of classification
employed means the cube root of the product of the greatest and least
diameters of a grain multiplied by a third diameter at right angles
to the greatest and least. The “effective” size of any given mass of
sand means the greatest diameter of the finest 10 per cent of the
total mass. There is also a term called the “uniformity coefficient.”
The uniformity coefficient is the quotient arising from dividing
the greatest diameter of the finest 60 per cent of the mass by the
greatest diameter of the finest 10 per cent of the same mass. These are
arbitrary terms which have been reached by experience as convenient for
use in classifying sands. Evidently absolute uniformity in size will be
indicated by a uniformity coefficient of 1, and the greater the variety
in size the greater will be the uniformity coefficient. Sands taken
from different vicinities and sometimes even from the same bed will
exhibit a great range in size of grain.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.—Sizes of Grain or Fineness of Sand.]

Fig. 5 represents the actual variety of size of grain as found in
eight lots of sand among others examined in the laboratory of the
Massachusetts State Board of Health. The vertical scale shows the per
cent by weight of portions having the maximum grains less in diameter
than shown on the horizontal line. The more slope, like No. 5 or 6,
the greater is the variety in size of grain. Those lines more nearly
vertical belong to sands more nearly uniform in size of grain.

=222. Most Effective Sizes of Sand Grains.=—Investigations by the
Massachusetts State Board of Health indicate that a sand whose
effective diameter of grain is .2 mm. (.008 inch) is perhaps the most
efficient in removing organic matter and bacteria from natural potable
waters. At the same time wide experience with the operation of actual
filters seems to indicate that no particular advantage attaches to
any special size of grain, so long as it is not too fine to permit
the desired rate of filtration or so coarse as to allow the water to
flow through it too freely. Experiments have shown that effective
sizes of sand from .14 to .38 mm. in diameter possess practically
the same efficiency in a slow sand filter. The action of the filter
is apparently a partial straining out of both organic material and
bacteria, but chiefly the reduction of organic matter in the manner
already described and probably the destruction to a large extent of
the bacteria, especially those of a pathogenic nature, although at the
present time it is impossible to state the precise extent of either
mode of action.

=223. Air and Water Capacities.=—Another important physical feature of
filter-sands, especially in connection with intermittent filtration, is
the amount of voids between the grains. When the intermittent filter is
allowed to drain, so that the only water remaining in it is that held
between the grains by capillary attraction, generally at the bottom
of the filter unless the sand is very fine, the volume of the water
which remains in the voids is called the water capacity of the sand.
The remaining volume between the grains is called the air capacity of
the same sand. It is evident that the air capacity added to the water
capacity will make the total voids between the sand grains.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

Fig. 6 shows the amount of air and water capacities of the same sands
whose sizes of grains are exhibited in Fig. 5. The depth of the sand is
supposed to be 60 inches, as shown on the vertical line at the left of
the diagram, while the percentages of the total volume representing the
amounts of voids is shown on the horizontal line at the bottom of the
diagram. Both air and water capacities for each sand are shown by the
various numbered lines partially vertical and partially inclined. It
will be observed that the fine sands No. 2 and No. 4 have large water
capacities, the water capacity being shown by that part of the diagram
lying below and to the left of each line. It will be noticed that No.
5 sand is made up of approximately equal portions of fine and coarse
grains, the former largely filling the voids between the latter. This
mixture, as shown by the No. 5 line, gives a very high water capacity
and a correspondingly low air capacity. Obviously a sand with a high
water capacity has a correspondingly low air capacity, and in general
would not be a very good sand for an intermittent filter, since it
is the purpose of the latter to secure in the voids between the sand
grains as much oxygen as practicable whenever the filter may be at rest.

=224. Bacterial Efficiency and Purification—Hygienic Efficiency.=—As
the function of a filter is to remove as far as possible the organic
matter and bacteria of the applied water, there must be some criterion
by which its efficiency in the performance of those functions can be
expressed. The bacterial efficiency is represented by the ratio found
by dividing the number of bacteria after filtration in a prescribed
cubic unit, as a cubic centimeter, by the number which the same
volume of raw water held before being applied to the filter. This is
a rather misleading ratio, for the reason that the effluent water may
contain bacteria of certain species which grow in the lower portions
of a filter or in the drains which conduct the effluent from it.
It is possible, therefore, that bacteria may be found in a filter
effluent when all of the bacteria originally held in the water have
been removed. Hence the ratio expressing what is called the bacterial
purification arises from dividing the number of bacteria actually
removed from a cubic centimeter of water by the filter by the number
originally held by a cubic centimeter of raw water. The smaller the
first of these ratios the higher the degree of efficiency. Extended
experience, both in the filters of such laboratories as that of the
Massachusetts State Board of Health and with actual filters of public
water-supplies, show that under attainable conditions of operation 98
to 100 per cent of all the bacteria originally found in the water may
be removed.

There is also used the term hygienic efficiency which is used in
connection with slow sand filters. This means simply the per cent of
pathogenic bacteria removed by the filter, and there is good reason to
believe that it is at least as high as the bacterial purification.

=225. Bacterial Activity near Top of Filter.=—The work of removal of
bacteria and organic matter has been found by extended investigations
to be performed almost entirely within 6 or 8 inches of the top surface
of the sand; indeed the most active part of that operation is probably
concentrated within less than 3 inches of the surface. At any rate the
retained bacteria and nitrogenous matter are found to decrease very
rapidly within a foot from the upper surface, below which stratum the
quantity is relatively very small and its rate of decrease necessarily
slow. A little of this nitrogenous or gelatinous matter is found to
surround to a slight extent the sand grains found at the bottom of the
filter. Some authorities have considered that the more steady uniform
efficiency of the deeper filters is due to this effect.

=226. Rate of Filtration.=—The rate at which water can be made to
flow through a slow sand filter is of economical importance, for the
reason that the higher the rate the less will be the area required
to purify a given quantity per day. Foreign engineers and other
sanitary authorities advocate generally slower rates of filtration
than American engineers are inclined to favor. The usual rate in
Europe is not far from 1.6 to 2.5 million gallons per acre per day.
There is also considerable range in this country, and the rate may
reach 3 million gallons per acre per day. Indeed a considerable number
of tests have shown that for short periods of time, at least, some
waters may be efficiently filtered at rates as high as 7 to 8 million
gallons per acre per day, but probably no American engineer is ready
to introduce such high rates as yet. As a matter of fact the rate will
depend considerably upon the character of water used. Clear water from
mountain lakes and streams uncontaminated and carrying little solid
material may be filtered safely and properly at much higher rates of
filtration than river or other waters carrying more sediment and more
organic matter. This principle is recognized both in Europe and in this
country. It would appear from experience that slow sand filters at
the present time with rates of 2.5 to 3 million gallons per acre per
day may be employed for practically any water that may be considered
suitable for a public supply, and that with these rates high degrees of
both bacterial purification and hygienic efficiency may be reached.

=227. Effective Head on Filter.=—Inasmuch as the depth of sand ranges
from perhaps 3 to 5 feet the water will experience considerable
resistance in flowing through it. The distance in elevation between
the water surface over the filter and that of the water as it leaves
the filter measures the loss of head experienced in passing through
the sand and the drainage-passages under it. It has been maintained
by some foreign authorities that this loss of head should be not
more than 24 to 30 inches; that a greater head would force the water
through the sand at such a rate as to render desired purification
impossible. Experience both in the laboratory and with public filters
in this country does not appear to sustain that view of the matter;
considerably greater heads than 30 inches have been used with entirely
satisfactory results both as to the removal of organic matter and
bacteria. It appears to be best so to arrange the flow of water through
the sand and the underdrains as to avoid in either a pressure below
the atmosphere, as in that case some of the dissolved air in the water
escapes and produces undesirable disturbances in the sand, resulting
in reduced efficiency. No precise rule can be given in respect to this
feature of filtration, but it seems probable that satisfactory results
may be obtained under proper working of filters with a loss of head
not greater than the depth of water on the filter added to the depth
of sand in it, although that maximum limit would ordinarily not be
reached. The depth of water on the filter may be taken from 3 to 5
feet. In this country it is seldom less than the least of these limits,
and perhaps not often equal to the greater limit.

=228. Constant Rate of Filtration Necessary.=—Care should be taken in
the operation of filters to avoid any sudden change in the texture
or degree of compactness of the sand. At the times when workmen
must necessarily walk over the surface they should be provided with
special broad-based footwear, so as to produce as little effect of
this kind as possible where they step. Sudden changes in the degree
of compactness cause correspondingly sudden changes in the rate of
filtration, and such changes produce a deterioration of efficiency.
This may be due to two or three reasons. Possibly such changes may open
small channels through which water finds its way too freely; or the
breaking of the gelatinous bond between the grains of sand may operate
prejudicially. At any rate it is essential to avoid such sudden changes
and maintain as nearly uniform a rate of filtration over the entire
filter as possible. Again, the age of a filter affects to some extent
its efficiency. A month or two of time is required, when a new filter
is started, to attain what may be called its normal efficiency. Even
after that length of time the filter gains in its power to retain and
destroy bacteria. This action is particularly characteristic of filters
formed of comparatively coarse sand.

=229. Scraping of Filters.=—More or less solid inert as well as organic
matter accumulates on the surfaces of the slow sand filters, so that
at the end of proper periods of time, depending upon the character
of the water filtered, this surface accumulation must be scraped off
and removed together with the sand into which it has penetrated. In
scraping the filter it is impossible to remove less than .25 or .5
inch of sand, and at least .5 to .75 inch is removed whenever a filter
is scraped. Sometimes 1 or 2 inches may be removed. This sand may be
washed and again placed upon the filter for use. The operation of
scraping exhibits a fresh sand surface to the applied water. It has
been held, particularly by foreign authorities, that this operation of
scraping militates against the efficiency of the filter for the time
being. The investigations of the Massachusetts State Board of Health
and other experiences in this country do not confirm that view which
is based on the assumption that the top nitrogenous film is essential
to efficiency. These investigations have shown that this film is not
necessary in intermittent filters; that in many instances no diminution
of efficiency has resulted from a removal of the film to a depth of
.3 inch; that even the presence of that film has not given efficiency
to coarse sand when the coating was thick enough to completely clog
the filter; and, further, that the material of this nitrogenous
film is found at a depth of several inches below the surface. It is
practically certain that the scraping to depths not exceeding 1 inch
have no sensible effect upon the efficiency under proper management and
operation of the filters. This is particularly true if the thickness of
sand is from 3 to 5 feet. It is undoubtedly true that with very shallow
sand filters from 1 to 2 feet in depth the scraping of the surface may
have some effect upon bacterial efficiency.

It has been the custom in connection with some European filters to
waste the water which first passes through after cleaning, but the
usual practice in this country is to fill slowly the filter with
filtered water from below and, after the sand is submerged, to permit
it to stand a little while before use. Care taken in this manner will
insure an efficiency to a freshly scraped filter sufficient to avoid
any wastage.

=230. Introduction of Water to Intermittent Filters.=—Where
intermittent filters are used it is of the greatest importance to
conduct the water to them so as not to disturb the sand on their
surfaces. This can readily be done in a number of ways. If the shape
of the filter is not oblong, it will be advisable to form a number of
main drains or passages in the sand from which smaller depressions or
passages near together may lead the water to all parts of the surface.
The flowing of the first water through these depressions will permit
the entire surface to be covered so gradually as not to disturb the
sand grains, and it is essential that such means or their equivalent
be employed. If the filter is long and narrow in shape, the main
ditch along one of the longer sides, with depressions at right angles
to it or across the filter and near together, will be sufficient
to accomplish the desired purpose. Obviously when filters are not
intermittently used such precautions are not needed.

=231. Effect of Low Temperature.=—In the early days of the use of
sand filters in this country it was frequently supposed that the low
temperature of the winter caused decreased bacterial purification and a
decrease in power to reduce organic material. It now appears that such
is not the case. The effects of low temperature, such as is experienced
in winters of this climate, may be overcome by temporarily covering the
filters so that heavy ice cannot form and produce disturbances in one
way or another prejudicial to efficiency of operation. The agencies
which operate to reduce efficiency in cold weather are no longer
believed to be those due to low temperature. They are rather indirect
and mechanical, and may be readily overcome by the prevention of the
formation of ice.

=232. Choice of Intermittent or Continuous Filtration.=—The process of
slow sand filtration when continuous has been shown by experience to
be entirely effective for ordinary potable waters, but in those cases
where the amount of dissolved oxygen may be low and where the amount
of organic matter is relatively high it may be advisable to resort to
intermittent filtration. Neither method, however, can be depended upon
to render potable a water which has been robbed of its free oxygen
by an excessive amount of contaminated organic matter. Nor can these
processes be expected to remove coloring matter produced by peaty
soils or other conditions in which large amounts of vegetable matter
have been absorbed by the water. The methods, therefore, have their
limitations, although their field of application is sufficiently wide
to cover nearly all classes of potable water.

=233. Size and Arrangement of Slow Sand Filters.=—Among the first
questions to arise in the design of slow sand filters are their size
and arrangement. The total area will be determined by the total daily
draft and the rate of filtration. Rates of filtration running from
2.5 to 3 million gallons per acre per day, or even more, have been
found satisfactory and are customary in this country. Having given,
therefore, the total daily quantity required, it is only necessary to
divide that by the rate of filtration per acre and the result will be
the number of acres required for the total filter-bed surface. This net
area, however, is not sufficient. Unless there is requisite storage of
filtered water to meet the variation in the hourly draft for the day,
the capacity of the filters must be sufficient to meet the greatest
hourly rate, which must be taken at least 1½ times the average hourly
demand during the day; indeed this is only prudent in any case.

Again, it is necessary to divide the total filter surface into small
portions called beds, so that one or more of them may be withdrawn from
use for cleaning or repairs, while a sufficient filter-area remains in
operation to supply the greatest hourly draft. This surplus area will
usually run from 5 to 20 per cent of the total area of the filter-beds,
although for small towns and cities it may be much more. The sizes of
the filter-beds will depend upon the local circumstances of each case.
It is evident that as each single bed must have its individual set of
appliances and its separating walls, the purpose of economy will be
best served by making the beds as large as practicable. At the same
time they must not be made too large, for in that case the portion
out of use might form so large a percentage of the total area as to
increase unduly the cost of the entire plant. A size of bed varying
between .5 and 1.5 acres is frequently and perhaps generally found
in foreign filtering-plants. If filter-beds range in area from .5
acre to 2 acres, the latter for large plants, the purposes of economy
and convenience in administration will probably be well served. The
grouping of the beds is an important consideration and will depend
somewhat, at least, upon the shape of the plot of ground taken for the
filters. It is advisable that the inlets to the different beds should,
as far as possible, discharge from a single inlet-pipe or main. This
will generally be most conveniently accomplished by making the beds
rectangular in shape, grouped on each side of the supply-main, with
their longest dimensions at right angles to it. This arrangement is
illustrated by the grouping of the filter-beds in the Albany plant,
shown in Fig. 7. In the case of a single oblong bed, like that at
Lawrence, Mass., shown in Fig. 4, page 284, its relatively great length
and small width makes it possible to run the main supply along one
side, from which branch depressions with concrete bottoms enable the
water to be distributed uniformly over its surface in the manner shown
in the figure. It is further necessary to group the filter-beds, pumps,
sand-cleaning appliances, and other portions of the plant, so that
the ends of economy and efficient administration may be served in the
highest degree. It is always necessary that these features of the whole
filtration system should be carefully kept in view in laying out the
entire plant.

=234. Design of Filter-beds.=—The preparation of the site for a group
of filtration-beds also involves the consideration of a number of
principal questions. In the first place, the depth required for the
sand and underdrains will not be far from 5 feet, and there must be a
suitable bottom prepared below the collecting-drains. Again, the depth
of water above the sand may vary from 3 to 5 feet, making the total
depth, including the bottom, of the filter proper about 10 or 11 feet,
and this may represent the depth of excavation to be made. If the
material on which the filter to be built is soft, it may be necessary
to drive piles to support the superincumbent weight. The bottom must be
made water-tight. This can be done either by the use of a layer of well
rammed or packed clay, 1 to 2 feet in thickness, carrying 6 or 8 inches
of concrete, or by a surface of paved brick or stone. If the sides of
the filter-beds are of embankments with surface slopes, the latter may
be protected in the same manner. If the sides are of walls of masonry,
concrete is an excellent material to be used for the purpose.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.—Sedimentation-basin and Filter-beds at Albany,
N. Y.]

[Illustration: Filtration-plant at Albany, N. Y.]

In designing the sides of filters or of the piers projecting up
through the sand for the support of the roof, in case there is one, it
is imperative that care be taken to prevent water from flowing down
through the joints between the sand and the sides of piers or the
masonry sides of the filter-beds. There should be no vertical joint
of that character, but the faces of masonry in contact with the sand
should both slope and be made in steps, so that any settlement of the
sand will tend to close the joint, while the steps will prevent flow.
Nor should there be angles in which sand is to be packed; filleted
corners are far preferable and should be used.

=235. Covered Filters.=—It has become the custom where the best results
are expected in cold climates, if not in all cases, to cover filters
with masonry roofs of domes and cylindrical or groined arches supported
on masonry columns. Such roofs are usually covered with earth to a
depth of 1 to 2 or 3 feet. They prevent any injurious action on the
sides of the filters produced by thick ice or the effects of such
ice upon the upper portions of the sand. In summer they also protect
against the baking and cracking of the upper surface of the sand when
exposed to the sun and prevent, to a considerable extent, the growth
of algæ in different portions of the beds. They are expensive, filters
with masonry covers costing once and a half to twice as much as open
filters, but they enhance the sanitary value of the water. The height
of the masonry roof must be about 2 to 3 feet above the upper surface
of the water and high enough to offer convenient access to the sand
when it is to be cleaned and renewed. The length of span for the arches
or domes is seldom more than 12 or 15 feet.

=236. Clear-water Drain-pipes of Filters.=—After the water has passed
through the sand it must be withdrawn from the bottom of the filter
with as little resistance as practicable. This necessitates, in the
first place, the bottom of the filter to be so shaped as to induce
the flow of the filtered water toward the lines of drain-pipes which
are laid to receive it. These pipes consist of the main members and
the branches, the main members being laid along the centres of the
beds and the branches running from them. The bottoms of the filters,
therefore, should be formed with depressions in which the main pipes
are laid, and with such grades as to expedite the movement of the water
flowing through the branches. If the bottoms are of concrete, they can
advantageously be made of inverted arches or domes, the drain-pipes
being laid along the lines of greatest depression. In such cases the
loads produced by the weight of the roof are more nearly uniformly
distributed over the bottom. The sizes of the drains will be dependent
upon the areas from which they withdraw water. It is advisable to make
them rather large, in order that the water may flow through them more
freely. They seldom need exceed 6 or 8 inches. They are preferably made
of salt-glazed vitrified pipes laid with open joints, around and in the
vicinity of which are placed gravel or broken stone, the largest pieces
with a maximum diameter of 1 to 2 inches. The largest broken stone or
coarsest gravel is near the pipe and should decrease in size as the
drain-pipe is receded from, so that the final portions of the gravel
farthest removed from the drains will not permit the filter-sand to
pass into it. When properly designed and arranged, the loss of head in
passing from the farthest points of a filter-bed to the point of exit
from the filter will not exceed about .01 to .02 of a foot.

[Illustration: Interior of Covered Filter at Ashland, Wis.]

=237. Arrangement of the Sand at Lawrence and Albany.=—Above this
gravel is placed the filtering-sand, about 4 feet thick in the Albany
filter and 3 to 4 feet thick in the filter at Lawrence, Mass. The sand
in the Albany filter was specified to have not “more than 10 per cent
less than .27 mm.” in diameter and “at least 10 per cent by weight
shall be less than .36 mm.” in diameter. Over the entire floor was
spread not more than 12 inches of gravel or broken stone, the lower
7 inches consisting of broken stone or gravel with greatest diameter
varying from 1 inch to 2 inches; the remaining 5 inches of the lower
1 foot was composed of broken stone or gravel decreasing from 1 inch
in greatest diameter to a grain a little coarser than that of the
sand above it. In all cases, sand for the filter-bed should be free
from everything that can be classed as dirt, including clay, loam,
and vegetable matter. Furthermore, it should be free from any mineral
matter which might change the character of the water and render it less
fit for use.

[Illustration: Partially Filled Covered Sand Filter showing Drain-pipe.]

This filtering-sand is usually placed in position with a horizontal
surface. At Lawrence, however, it was placed with a wavy surface, the
horizontal distance between the crests of two consecutive waves being
30 feet, the concrete gutter for admitting the water being half-way
between, all as shown in the illustrations. The sand of this filter
was of two grades, the coarser sand having an effective size of 0.3
mm. (.118 inch) and the finer an effective size of 0.25 mm. (.098
inch). The two different sizes of sand are seen not to be arranged
in horizontal layers, but so that the finer is over the drains and
the coarser between. The No. 70 sand is capable of passing 70 million
gallons per acre per day with a head on it equal to the depth of sand,
while the No. 50 sand can pass 50 million gallons per acre per day
with a head on it equal to its depth. There appears to be no special
advantage in placing the sand in filters other than in horizontal
layers with an effective size practically uniform.

=238. Velocity of Flow through Sand.=—The velocity with which water
will flow through a given depth of sand with a known depth or head
above the surface of the latter has been carefully investigated by the
Massachusetts State Board of Health with the following results:

    _v_ = the velocity at which a solid column of water,
        whose section equals in area that of the bed of sand,
        moves downward through the sand in meters per day; this
        is practically the number of million gallons passing
        through the sand per acre per day.
    _c_ = a constant, having the value of 1000 for clean sand,
        and 800 for filter-sand after having been some time in use.
    _d_ = the effective size of the sand-grain in millimeters.
    _h_ = the head lost by the water in passing through the sand
        at the rate v; this is the effective head of water producing
        motion through the sand.
    _l_ = the thickness of the sand bed.
    _t_ = the temperature of the water in degrees Fahr.

The velocity _v_, as determined by experiment, takes the following form:

                _h_ (_t_ + 10)
    _v_ = _cd²_ --- (--------).
                _l_ (   60   )

This formula cannot be used for the flow of water through all sands of
all thicknesses and under all circumstances. It is limited to effective
diameters of sand between .1 and 3 mm., having a uniformity coefficient
not greater than 5. _h_ and _l_ may be taken in any unit as long as
both are expressed in the same unit, since the ratio of the two
quantities will then not be affected. If the effective head of water
on the filter or the head lost is equal to the thickness of the bed of
sand, the ratio of _h_ divided by _l_ will be 1. In case the formula is
used to express the quantity of water flowing through the sand per acre
per day, it must be remembered that _v_ will be the number of million
gallons and not the total number of gallons. The formula can only be
used when the sand is well compacted and where the voids of the sand
are entirely filled with water.

=239. Frequency of Scraping and Amount Filtered between Scrapings.=—The
frequency of the scraping of filters will depend upon the amount of
organic matter in the water and upon the rate of filtration. Between
the years 1893 and 1900 the periods between scrapings of the Lawrence
filter ranged generally from 20 to 32 days, although periods as small
as 13 or 19 are found in the records. The quantity of water passed
between scrapings varies generally from 67 million to 90 million
gallons, although it fell as low as 49 millions and rose as high as
109 millions. In the case of the Albany filter-plant, up to the end of
the year 1900 the shortest period between scrapings was about 15 days
and the longest about 42 days, the smallest quantity of water passing
through any filter between scrapings being 26,735,000 gallons and the
largest 76,982,000 gallons. The operation of the Albany filters for
the year 1901 shows that the average run of a bed was 26 days between
scrapings, with a total of 70,000,000 gallons per acre for that period.
These figures represent about the usual workings of slow sand filters
at the present time, the period between scrapings running usually
between 15 and 30 days, and the quantity from 30 million gallons per
acre to 100 million gallons per acre.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Filters for City of Albany, N. Y.]

=240. Cleaning the Clogged Sand.=—The clogged sand scraped from the top
of the filters at the periods of cleaning is removed to a convenient
point where appliances and machinery are available for washing it. This
is an item of some importance in the administration of filters, as the
sand which is removed and washed is at a later period replaced upon the
filter-bed. Various methods have been tried for the purpose of cleaning
sand efficiently and economically. The continuous ejector sand-washer,
one set of which is used at Albany, is probably as efficient as any
machine yet devised. It is shown in Fig. 8. It will be observed that
the dirty sand is fed to the machine at one end into a hopper-shaped
receptacle. In the bottom of this hopper is a nozzle through which
water is discharged from a pipe running along the entire bottom of the
machine. This jet of water forces the sand upward through a suitable
pipe into a reservoir which discharges the sand and water into another
hopper, and so on through the series of five. Evidently there may be
any number of hoppers in the series, a jet of water being provided at
the bottom of each. In this manner the sand and water are thoroughly
mixed together and compelled to flow upward from each hopper to the
next, the dirty water overflowing also from each hopper into a tank
underneath, whence it runs to waste. The clean sand and water flow out
of the machine at the end opposite to that at which they entered. After
the washed sand is dried it is ready to be replaced in the filter.

=241. Controlling or Regulating Apparatus.=—It is essential to the
proper working of a slow sand filter that the amount of water admitted
to and passing through it shall be as nearly uniform as practicable.
This necessitates controlling or regulating apparatus, of which there
are two general classes, the one automatic and the other worked by
hand. There are a considerable number of appliances of both classes.
The filtered water flows from the end of the drains to one or two
small tanks formed by suitable masonry walls immediately outside of
the filter-beds and rises to a level determined by the loss of head
in passing through the filter. The difference in elevation between
the water surface over the sand and that in the filtered water-tanks
shows the effective head which causes the water to flow through the
sand. The object of the controlling or regulating appliances is to keep
that head as nearly constant as possible. Both the hand and automatic
appliances preserve the value of that head by maintaining constant
discharges through either vertical or horizontal orifices, the orifices
themselves being movable. They may be rectangular or other orifices
with horizontal lips or crests. If the control is automatic it is
accomplished usually by a float which raises and lowers the orifice in
such a way as to maintain a constant difference of level between the
filtered and the unfiltered water. The figures illustrate both types of
regulating appliances, the actions of which will be readily understood.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.—Ejector Sand-washer.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9.—Ball-float Regulator of Rate of Filtration.]

[Illustration: FIG. 10.—Regulator in Use in Zurich, Switzerland. M.
Peter, Engineer.]

=242. Cost of Slow Sand Filters.=—The cost of both the open and
covered slow sand filters will obviously vary according to the cost of
labor and materials at their sites. The original cost of the Lawrence
filter, about 2.44 acres in total area, was nearly $25,000 per acre.
The cost of covered filters, so far as constructed in this country,
varies from about $44,000 to nearly $51,000 per acre excluding the
pipe, pumping plants, and sedimentation-basins. The Albany covered
filters cost about $38,000 per acre including filtering materials, but
excluding excavation, pumps, buildings, sedimentation-basins, piping,
and sand-washing machinery, or nearly $46,000 per acre including those
items except pumps and sedimentation-basins. The roof, included in
the preceding estimate, cost about $14,000 per acre. The smaller the
filters the greater the cost per acre, as a rule, as would be expected.
A single open filter at Poughkeepsie and three open filter-beds at
Berwyn, Pa., cost respectively $42,000 and $36,000 per acre, the
former being little less than .7 acre in area and the latter having an
aggregate area of a little more than one half acre. A covered filter at
Ashland, Wis., consisting of three beds of one sixth acre each, cost at
the rate of about $70,000 per acre.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.—Regulating Apparatus Designed by Allen Hazen
for the Albany Filters.]

[Illustration: FIG. 12.—Regulator of Rate of Filtration.]

=243. Cost of Operation of Albany Filter.=—The cost of operating
the Albany filter, including only the costs of scraping, removing
sand, refilling, incidentals, lost time, and washing the sand during
seventeen months ending December 29, 1900, was $1.66 per million
gallons filtered. The cost of removing the sand (excluding scraping),
washing, and refilling was $1.21 per cubic yard. The total cost of
operating the entire filter-plant, including all items, for the year
1900 was $4.52 per million gallons filtered. This covers all expenses,
including pumping, superintendence, and laboratory, which can be
charged to the operation of the filter-plant. The average removal of
albuminoid ammonia at Albany for the year 1900 was 49 per cent and
of the free ammonia 78 per cent of that in the raw water, while the
average bacterial removal was over 99 per cent, running from 98.3 per
cent to 99.6 per cent. The volume of water used in washing the sand was
about twelve and a half times the volume of the sand. Each cubic yard
of sand washed, therefore, required twelve and a half cubic yards of
water.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.—Regulator Designed by W. H. Lindley for the
Filters at Warsaw, Poland.]

=244. Operation and Cost of Operation of Lawrence Filter.=—It was
originally intended that the Lawrence filter should be worked
intermittently. The Merrimac River water, which is used by the city of
Lawrence, was known to carry at certain periods of the year sufficient
typhoid germs received from the city of Lowell to produce at least
mild epidemics. The intermittent operation was considered necessary to
furnish the filter with the requisite oxygen to destroy beyond a doubt
all pathogenic bacteria. The increasing demands of water consumption
during the years that have elapsed since filtration began in 1894 have
seriously modified these conditions, so that the intermittent feature
of operation of the filter is no longer very prominent. During 1898,
for instance, the filter was drained only four to thirteen times
per month, with an average of eight monthly drainings. In 1899 the
drainings were more frequent, varying from five to fourteen per month
and averaging eleven times. Finally, in 1900, the monthly drainings
ranged from three to thirteen, with an average of eight. It may be
considered, therefore, that the Lawrence filter occupies a kind of
intermediate position between intermittent and continuous operation.

The total cost of operating the filter at Lawrence, including scraping
and washing of sand, refilling, removal of snow and ice, and general
items in the period from 1895 to 1900, both inclusive, varied from a
minimum of $7.70 per million gallons to $9.00 per million gallons. If
the removal of snow and ice be omitted, these amounts will be reduced
to $5.10 and $6.90 respectively. The cost of washing the sand only in
the Lawrence filter during the same period varied from 45 to 67 cents
per cubic yard. The volume of water required for that washing varied
from ten to fourteen times the volume of sand.

=245. Sanitary Results of Operation of Lawrence and Albany
Filters.=—The average number of bacteria in the Merrimac River water
applied to the filter during the period 1894 to 1899, both inclusive,
varied from about 1900 per cubic centimeter to 34,900, and the
percentage of reduction attained by passing the water through the
filter varied in the same period generally from 97 to 99.8 per cent,
with an average of about 99.1 per cent.

In the city of Lawrence the average number of cases of typhoid
fever per 10,000 of population has been about one third, since the
introduction of filtered water, of the number of cases which existed
prior to the installation of the filters, and less than one fourth as
many deaths. A large number of the cases of typhoid occurring after the
installation of the filter have been traced to the use of unfiltered
water, and it is probable that all or nearly all could be similarly
accounted for.

In the city of Albany the experience had been quite similar. The
average number of deaths per year from typhoid fever for ten years
before the introduction of filtered water was 84, while in 1900, with
the filter in operation, the total number of deaths was 39. These
figures are sufficient to show the marked beneficial effect of filtered
water on the public health.

[Illustration: Jewell Filter.]

=246. Rapid Filtration with Coagulants.=—It has been seen that the rate
of filtration through open sand filters does not usually exceed 2 to
4 million gallons per acre per day under ordinary circumstances. Much
greater rates would clog the sand and produce less efficient results.
Experience has also shown that such methods cannot be depended upon to
remove from water coloring matter of a vegetable origin or very finely
divided sediment. In order to accomplish these ends it is necessary to
employ suitable chemicals which, acting as coagulants, may accomplish
results impracticable in the open filter. Resort has therefore been
made first to the adoption of suitable coagulants and then to such
increased heads or pressures as to force the water through the sand
at rates from 25 to 30 or even 50 times as great as practicable in
slow sand filtration. These rapid sand filters are called mechanical
filters. If the water is forced through them under pressure, they
consist of closed tanks in which sand is placed so as to leave
sufficient volume above it for the influent water and, supported upon
a platform carrying perforated pipes, strainers, or equivalent details
through which the filtered water may flow into a suitable system of
effluent pipes in the lower part of the filter. If water is forced
through the sand by the required head, the upper part of the filter may
be open, but of sufficient height to accommodate it. The same filtering
material, clean sand, is used as in the slow filters; the only
differences, aside from the higher rate of filtration, are the greater
head and the introduction of a coagulant to the water. The depth of
sand used may vary from 2 to 4 feet. The thickness of a relatively fine
sand may be less than that of a coarser sand.

=247. Operation of Coagulants.=—The coagulant which has been found to
give the best results is ordinary alum or sulphate of aluminum. If
sulphate of aluminum is dissolved in water containing a little lime or
magnesia, aluminum hydrate and sulphuric acid are formed. The aluminum
hydrate is a sticky gelatinous substance which gathers together in a
flocculent mass the particles of suspended matter in the water, and it
also adheres to the grains of sand when those masses have settled to
the bottom. This flocculent, gelatinous mass covers the sand and passes
into its voids. As the water is forced through it the bacteria and
suspended matter are held, leaving a clear effluent to pass through.
Other coagulants are used, such as the hydrate of iron, but it costs
more than alum and is not so effective in removing color, although
it is an excellent coagulant for removing turbidity. Physicians have
made objection to the use of alum for this purpose, on the ground that
any excess might pass into distribution-pipes and so be consumed by
the water-users to the detriment of health. While it is possible that
further experience may show that there is material ground for this
objection, it has thus far not been found to be so. It is, however,
essential that only the necessary amount of alum should be used and
that there may be a sufficient amount of alkali to combine with the
sulphuric acid. Otherwise the acidulated water may attack the iron and
lead pipes and so injure the water and produce serious trouble. It
can only be stated that the method and operation of these mechanical
filters have thus far been sufficiently successful to avoid any of
these difficulties.

[Illustration: The Jewell Filter-plant at Norristown, Penn.]

=248. Principal Parts of Mechanical Filter-plant—Coagulation and
Subsidence.=—The principal parts of a complete mechanical filter-plant
in the order of their succession are a solution-tank, a measuring-tank,
a sedimentation-basin, and a filter. In case of great turbidity
the sedimentation may be completed in two stages, the first in a
settling-basin prior to receiving the coagulant, and the second in
another basin subsequent to the coagulation. The tanks are usually
of wood, although they may be of steel. The solution-tank is a
comparatively small vessel in which the alum is dissolved. The solution
is then run into the measuring-tank, from which it flows into the water
at a constant rate maintained by suitable regulating apparatus. It is
imperative for the successful working of the mechanical filter-plant
that the coagulant be introduced to the water at a uniform rate.
This rate will obviously depend upon the character of the water. The
coagulating solution runs from the measuring-tank into the pipe through
which the water to be filtered flows and in which it first receives
the alum. The water and the coagulating solution are thus thoroughly
mixed and flow into the sedimentation-basin. The subsidence which is
provided for in this basin may be omitted in very clear waters which
carry little solid matter, but the operation of the filter itself will
be more satisfactorily accomplished if as much work as feasible is done
before reaching it. The mixture must remain in this basin a sufficient
length of time to allow such subsidence as can reasonably be attained.

It appears from experience in this part of the work that it is not well
to introduce the coagulant too long before the water enters the filter,
especially if the water be fairly clear. In the case of the presence
of finely divided solid matter, however, sufficient time must be
permitted for the necessary settlement. A period ranging in length from
½ hour to 6 or 8 hours may be advantageously assigned to this part of
the operation, the shorter period for clear waters and the longer for
very turbid waters. It has been suggested that two applications of the
coagulant might be beneficial, the principal portion being given to the
water before entering the sedimentation-basin and the other just before
the waters enters the filter. The work of the filter, especially with
turbid waters, may be much reduced by simple subsidence for a period
of perhaps 24 hours before receiving the coagulant, the secondary
subsidence taking place in the settling-basin in the manner already
described. Duplicate solution- and measuring-tanks will be required in
order that the process may be continuous while one set is out of use.
In this process it is absolutely essential also that the coagulant
should be of the best quality, inferior grades having been found to be
unsatisfactory in their operation.

=249. Amount of Coagulant—Advantageous Effect of Alum on Organic
Matter.=—The amount of sulphate of alumina will vary largely with the
quality of water. In the investigation made by Mr. Fuller in connection
with the Ohio River supply for the city of Cincinnati, he found that
with very slight turbidity only ¾ grain was required per gallon of
water, but that a high degree of turbidity required as much as 4.4
grains per gallon, with intermediate amounts for intermediate degrees
of turbidity. It was estimated that these quantities would correspond
to an average annual amount of about 1.6 grains per gallon. In case
there should be a period of three days of subsidence preliminary to
filtration, he estimated that for the greater part of the time the
amount of alum would vary from 1 to 3 grains per gallon. Occasionally
more and sometimes less would be required.

Alum has some specially valuable qualities in connection with this
class of purification work. It combines with coloring matter,
particularly that which has been acquired from contact of the water
with vegetation, and precipitates it. It seems to combine also, to some
extent, with the organic matter carried by the water and thus enhances
the efficiency of filtration.

=250. High Heads and Rates for Rapid Filtration.=—The principal work
of investigation of filtration in mechanical or pressure filters has
been made for the cities of Pittsburg, Cincinnati, Louisville, and
Providence, R. I. In the experimental work of those investigations
rates of filtration ranging from 46 million to 170 million gallons per
acre per day have been employed with essentially the same efficiency.
This is a practical result of great importance, particularly if in
the continued use of these filters on a large scale a satisfactorily
high efficiency can be reached and maintained. It was observed that
the number of bacteria in the effluent varied with that in the raw
water. It was also noticed that similarly to the operation of slow sand
filters the rate of filtration should not be changed suddenly, as that
is likely to cause breaks in the sand and militate against continued
efficiency.

In his experimental work at Cincinnati Mr. Fuller found that with
fine sand an available head on the filter of 12 feet gave economical
results. He also states that “high rates are more economical than low
ones, and that the full head which can be economically used should be
provided. Just where the economical limit of the rate of filtration is
can only be determined from practical experience with a wider range of
conditions than exist here, but there seem to be no indications that
the capacity of a plant originally constructed on a medium rate basis
(100 million to 125 million gallons per acre daily) could not readily
and economically be increased, as the consumption demanded, to rates at
least as high as the highest tried here (170 million gallons per acre
daily), provided the full economical increase in loss of head could be
obtained.”

=251. Types and General Arrangement of Mechanical Filters.=—These
mechanical or pressure (by gravity) filters have until lately been
constructed by companies owning patents either on the process or on
the different parts of the filters. The fundamental patent, however,
protecting rapid sand filters with the continuous application of
a coagulant has expired and the city of Louisville, Ky., is now
constructing rapid sand filters different in design from those
heretofore used. The types that have been most common heretofore are
the Jewell subsidence gravity filter, the Continental gravity filter,
the New York sectional-wash gravity filter, and others. They all
possess the main feature of accelerating the rate of filtration by
pressure, either in a closed tank (rarely) with comparatively small
water volume above the sand or by an open filter with sufficient head
of water above the sand to accomplish the high rate desired. This
latter method is that now generally used, as by it the requisite
steadiness of head or pressure can be secured. The closed type is
subject to objectionable sudden changes of pressure which prevent
or break uniform rates of filtration. The sand is supported upon a
platform with a suitable system of pipes fitted with valves or gates
for the withdrawal of the filtered water, the space below the platform
forming a small sedimentation-chamber. They are usually constructed in
comparatively small circular units, so that one or more of a group may
be withdrawn from operation for the purposes of cleaning or repairs
without interfering with the operation of the others. This system of
small units, gives some marked practical advantages, as housing is
readily accomplished, and if necessary the plant may be easily removed
from one point to another.

[Illustration: Continental Filter.]

It is obvious that with the large amount of water forced through
a given area of filter-bed the sand will become clogged within a
comparatively short time, requiring washing and replacing. Mr. Fuller
found at Cincinnati that the periods between washings when fine sand
was used in the filters ranged from 8 to 24 hours, with an average of
15, but with coarse sand the average became 20, with a range of from
6 to 36 hours. The time required for washing the sand at Cincinnati
was 20 minutes for coarse or 30 minutes for fine. At Providence Mr.
Weston found that the average time of washing was about 11 minutes.
The cleaning is accomplished partially by stirring the sand with
revolving arms, as shown in the accompanying figures, but generally
by forcing the water in a reverse direction through the sand and
allowing the wash-water either to run to waste or to be again purified.
The filters are designed for the purpose of cleaning by the reversal
of the direction of the flow of water. Latterly the sand has been
cleaned by forcing compressed air at a low pressure through it and the
superimposed water. The passage of the air or water upward through the
sand produces such a commotion among the grains that they rub against
each other and clean themselves of the adhering material, allowing it
to be carried off by the water above the sand. Both methods are much
used and are satisfactorily effective for the purpose.

It was found at Cincinnati that 4 to 9 per cent, with an average of 5
per cent, of filtered water was required for washing the fine sand, and
only 2 to 6 per cent, with an average of 3 per cent, for the coarse
sand of the mechanical filters used in Mr. Fuller’s experiments. Mr.
Weston has found about the same figures in his experimental work at
Providence. The wash-water need not be wasted at all if it is pumped
back into the subsidence-tanks.

It has been found in some cases that the efficiency of the filters
after washing is not quite normal, and that possibly 2 or 3 per cent
of the water must be wasted unless it is allowed to run back into
the subsidence-tanks and again pass through the filter. Under such
circumstances it has required 20 to 30 minutes of operation of the
filter after washing to regain its normal efficiency.

=252. Cost of Mechanical Filters.=—The cost of these mechanical filters
has been found to range as high as a rate of $500,000 per acre, which
is probably about ten times as much as the rate of cost for the slow
sand filters. On the other hand, the efficiency of the mechanical
filters may be as high as the other class, with a rate of filtration
from thirty to fifty times as great, and with a cost of operation less
than that of the slow sand filters. The cost of the filters per million
gallons of filtered water may, therefore, be reduced to perhaps one
fourth of that of the slow sand type.

=253. Relative Features of Slow and Rapid Filtration.=—It is premature,
even unnecessary, to make a comparison between the slow and rapid sand
filters. The former are well adapted to a large class of potable waters
in which there is not too much or too finely divided solid matter and
in which the coloring from organic origin is not serious. They have
the advantage of requiring no chemicals and are capable of attaining a
high degree of efficiency. The average rate of filtration may be taken
about 3,000,000 gallons per acre per day. The rapid sand filter, on the
contrary, requires the application of a coagulant, but has thirty to
fifty times the capacity of the other class. It is better adapted to
the removal of turbidity and color, and when properly operated it gives
a high efficiency. A sufficiently extended experience has not yet,
however, been attained to enable a complete statement to be made as to
the entire field to which they may be adapted. They have certainly been
shown to possess valuable qualities in a number of respects, and they
are undoubtedly destined to play an important part in the purification
of waters.




PART IV.

_SOME FEATURES OF RAILROAD ENGINEERING._




CHAPTER XXI.


=254. Introductory.=—The first step toward the construction of a
railroad is the location of the line, which requires as an initiative
a careful ocular examination of the general vicinity of the proposed
road, supplemented by simple and approximate instrumental work rapidly
performed. Following this reconnaissance, as it is called, more
complete surveys and examinations are made both in the field and on the
maps plotted from the data of the field-work. The prosecution of this
series of operations produces the final location, together with the
accumulation of such maps, profiles, and other data as may be required
in the construction of the road-bed, bridges, and other structures
constituting the complete railroad line with its ballast and track in
place ready for traffic.

The ultimate purpose of any railroad line is the transportation of
passengers and freight under conditions, including those of a physical
nature connected with the road as well as the rates received, leading
to profitable returns. Competition or other circumstances attending the
traffic of a given road will fix the maximum rates to be charged for
transportation. It is the business, first, of the civil engineer so to
locate and design the road and, second, of the manager so to conduct
the transportation as to make the margin of profits the greatest
possible. It will be the purpose of this lecture to consider in a
general way only some of the features of a railroad and its operation
which are related directly to civil-engineering.

[Illustration: The Royal Gorge.]

=255. Train Resistances.=—It is a fact confirmed by constant daily
experience that, however nicely the machine impelling the railroad
train or the tracks supporting the cars may be built, considerable
frictional and other resistance is offered to the movement of the train
when the latter passes over a perfectly level and straight track.

A considerable portion of the cost of transportation is expended in
overcoming this resistance. When the line fails to be either level
or straight other resistances of magnitude are developed; they are
called the resistances of grades and curves: and it is the business of
the civil engineer so to design the railroad as to reduce these two
classes of resistance to an absolute minimum, in view of certain other
conditions which must be concurrently maintained.

=256. Grades.=—The grade of a railroad is expressed usually in this
country by the number of feet through which 100 feet of length of line
rises or falls, or by some expression equivalent to that. If, for
instance, the line rises 1.5 or 2 feet in 100, it is said to have an
ascending grade of 1.5 or 2 per cent. Or if the line falls the same
amount in the same length, it is said to have a descending grade of
1.5 or 2 per cent. It is evident that a grade which descends in one
direction would be an ascending grade for trains moving in the opposite
direction, so that grades favoring traffic in one direction oppose it
in the other. Hence, other things being equal, that road is the most
advantageous for the movement of trains which has the least grade. The
grades of railroads seldom exceed 2 or 2.5 per cent, although, as will
presently be shown, there are some striking exceptions to that general
observation. The actual angles of inclination of railroad tracks
from a horizontal line are therefore as angles very small, but their
disadvantages for traffic increase rapidly.

A simple principle in mechanics shows that if the railroad train with
a weight _W_ moves up a 2 per cent grade, one component of the train
weight acts directly against the tractive force of the locomotive or
other motive power. If _a_ is the angle of inclination of the track
to a horizontal line, this opposing component will have the value _W_
sin _a_. When angles are small their sines are essentially equal to
their tangents. Hence, in this case, sin _a_ would have the value .02
or ¹/₅₀ of the train weight. If the weight of the train were 500 tons,
which is a rather light train for the present time, this opposing force
would be 10 tons, or 20,000 pounds, which, as we shall see later on, is
more than one half of the total tractive force of any but the heaviest
locomotives built at the present day. This simple instance shows the
advantage of keeping railroad grades down to the lowest practicable
values.

One of the most economical freight-carrying roads in the United States
is the Lake Shore and Michigan Southern of the New York Central system,
running from Buffalo to Chicago. Its maximum grade is 0.4 of 1 per
cent. The maximum grade of the N. Y. C. & H. R. R. R. is 0.75 of 1 per
cent between New York City and Albany and between Albany and Buffalo,
1.74 per cent at Albany, 1.12 per cent at Schenectady, and 1 per cent
at Batavia. Pushers or assistant locomotives are used for heavy trains
at the three latter points. The maximum grade of the Pennsylvania R. R.
on the famous Horseshoe Curve between Altoona and Cresson is 1.8 per
cent. It is advantageous, whereever practicable, to concentrate heavy
grades within a short distance, as in the case of the New York Central
at Albany, and use auxiliary engines, called pushers or assistants.
Some of the heaviest grades used in this country are found on the
trans-continental lines where they pass the summits of the Rocky
Mountains or the Sierras. In one portion of its line over a stretch of
25.4 miles the Southern Pacific R. R. rises 2674 feet with a maximum
grade of 2.2 per cent; also approaching the Tehacipi Pass in California
the maximum grade is about 2.4 per cent. At the Marshall Pass on the
Denver & Rio Grande R. R. there is a rise of 3675 feet in 25 miles with
a maximum grade of 4 per cent. The Central Pacific R. R. (now a part of
the Southern Pacific system) rises 992 feet in 13 miles with a maximum
grade of 2 per cent. The Northern Pacific R. R. rises at one place 1668
feet in an air-line distance of 13 miles with a maximum grade of 2.2
per cent. Probably the heaviest grade in the world on an ordinary steam
railroad is that of the Calumet Mine branch of the Denver & Rio Grande
R. R., which makes an elevation of 2700 feet in 7 miles on an 8 per
cent grade and with 25° curves as maximum curvature. These instances
are sufficient to illustrate maximum railroad grades found in the
United States.

=257. Curves.=—Civil engineers in different parts of the world have
rather peculiar classifications of curves. In this country the railroad
curve is indicated by the number of degrees in it which subtend a chord
100 feet in length. Evidently the smaller the radius or the sharper the
curvature the greater will be the number of degrees between the radii
drawn from the centre of a circle to the extremities of a 100-feet
chord. American civil engineers use this system for the reason that
the usual tape or chain used in railroad surveying is 100 feet long. A
very simple and elementary trigonometric analysis shows that under this
system the radius of any curve will be equal to 50 divided by the sine
of one half of the angle between the two radii drawn to the extremities
of the 100-feet chord. In other words, it is equal to 50 divided by
the sine of one half the degree of curvature. The application of this
simple formula will give the following tabular values of the radii for
the curves indicated:

    Curve.         Radius in Feet.

       1°            5729.65
       2°            2864.93
       3°            1910.08
       4°            1432.69
       5°            1146.28
       6°             955.36
       7°             819.02
       8°             716.78
       9°             637.27
      10°             573.69
      12°             478.74
      15°             383.06
      20°             287.91

=258. Resistance of Curves and Compensation in Grades.=—Inasmuch as
the resistance offered to hauling the train around a curve increases
quite rapidly as the radius of curvature decreases, it is obvious
that in constructing a railroad the degree of each curve should be
kept as low as practicable, and that there should be no more curves
than necessary. While no definite rule can be given as to such
matters, curves as sharp as 10° (573.69 feet radius) should be avoided
wherever practicable. It is not advisable to run trains at the highest
attainable speeds around such curves, nor is it done. Inasmuch as curve
resistance has considerable magnitude, as well as the resistance of
grades, it is natural that wherever curves occur grades should be less
than would be permissible on straight lines or, as they are called,
tangents. If a maximum gradient is prescribed in the construction of
a railroad, that gradient will determine the maximum weight of train
which can be hauled on the straight portions or tangents of the road.
If one of these grades should occur on a curve, a less weight of
train could be handled by the same engine than on a tangent. Hence it
is customary to reduce grades by a small amount for each degree of
curvature of a curve. This operation of modifying the grades on curves
so as to enable a locomotive to haul the same train around them as up
the maximum grade on a tangent is called compensating the curves for
grade. There is no regular rule prescribed for this purpose, because
the combination may necessarily vary between rather wide limits in
view of speed, condition of track, and other influencing elements.
The compensation, however, has perhaps frequently been taken as lying
between .03 and .05 per cent of grade for each degree of curvature. In
other words, for a 5° curve the grade would be .15 to .25 per cent less
than on a tangent. This compensation for grades is carefully considered
in each case by civil engineers in view of experience and such data as
special investigations and general railroad operation have shown to be
expedient.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. GRAVEL BALLAST]

[Illustration: FIG. 2. STONE BALLAST

NEW YORK CENTRAL & HUDSON RIVER RY.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3. PENNSYLVANIA RY.]


=259. Transition Curves.=—High speeds for which modern railroads are
constructed have made it necessary not only to protect road-beds, but
also to make the passage from tangents to curves as easy and smooth as
possible. This is accomplished by introducing between the curve and
the tangent at each end what is called a “transition” curve. This is a
compound curve, i.e., a curve with varying radius. At the point where
the tangent or straight line ceases the radius of the transition curve
is infinitely great, and it is gradually reduced to the radius of the
actual curve at the point where it meets the latter. By means of such
gradual change of curvature the trucks of a rapidly moving train do
not suddenly pass from the tangent to the curve proper, but they pass
gradually from motion in a straight line to the sharpest curvature over
the transition curve. The rate of transition is fixed by the character
of the curves, which have been subjected to careful analysis by civil
engineers, and they can be found fully discussed in standard works on
railroad location.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.—Baltimore Belt-line Tunnel, B. & O. Ry.]

=260. Road-bed, including Ties.=—Not only the high rates of speed of
modern railroad trains but the great weights of locomotives and cars
have demanded a remarkable degree of perfection in the construction of
the road-bed and in the manufacture of rails. The favorite ballast at
the present time for the best types of road-beds is generally broken
stone, although gravel is used. The first requisites are a solid
foundation and perfect drainage whether in cuts or fills. Figs. 1,
2, 3, and 4 show two or three types of road-bed used by the New York
Central and Hudson River R. R., the Pennsylvania R. R., and a special
type adopted by the B. & O. for the belt-line tunnel at Baltimore.
These sections show all main dimensions and the provision made for
drainage. The general depth of ballast is about 18 inches, including
the drainage layer at the bottom. The total width of road-bed for a
double-track line varies frequently between 24 and 25 feet, while the
width of a single-track line may be found between 13 and 14 feet. In
the cross-sections shown the requirements for drainage are found to be
admirably met. Timber ties are almost invariably used at the present
time in this country, although some experimental steel ties have
been laid at various points. Fig. 5 shows the steel tie adopted for
experiment on the N. Y. C. & H. R. R. R. within the city limits of New
York. The time will undoubtedly come when some substitute for timber
must be found, but the additional cost of steel ties at the present
time does not indicate their early adoption.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

[Illustration: Cañon of the Rio Las Animas, near Rockwood.]

=261. Mountain Locations of Railroad Lines.=—The skill of the civil
engineer is sometimes severely taxed in making mountain locations of
railroads. Probably no more skilful engineering work of this kind has
ever been done than in the crossings of the Rocky Mountains and the
Sierras in this country by trans-continental railroad lines, although
more striking examples of railroad location for short distances may
perhaps be found in Europe or other countries. The main problem in such

cases is the making of distance in order to attain a desired elevation
without exceeding maximum grades, such as those which have already
been given. Most interesting engineering expedients must sometimes
be resorted to. One of the oldest of these is the switchback plan
shown in Fig. 6. This is probably the simplest procedure in order to
make distance in attaining elevation. The line is run up the side of
a mountain at its maximum grade as far in one direction as it may be
desirable to go. It then runs back on itself a short distance before
being diverted so as to pass up another grade in the reverse direction.
This zigzagging of alignment may obviously be made to attain any
desired elevation and so overcome the summit of a mountain range. The
old switchback coal road near Mauch Chunk, Pa., is one of the oldest
and more famous instances of the method, which has many times been
employed in other locations.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

A more striking method, perhaps, is that of loops by which the
direction of a line or motion of a train on it is continuous. Distance
is made by a judicious use of the topography of the locality so as to
run the line as far up the side of the valley as practicable and then
turn as much as a semicircle or more, sometimes over a bridge structure
and sometimes in tunnel, so as to give further elevation by running
either on the opposite side of the valley or on the same. A succession
of loops or other curves suitably located will give the distance
desired in order to reach the summit.

=262. The Georgetown Loop.=—Fig. 7 shows one of these spiral or loop
locations on the Georgetown branch of the Union Pacific Railroad
in Colorado. It is a well-known and prominent instance of railroad
location of this kind. On the higher portion of this loop system
included in the figure there is a viaduct on a curve which crosses the
line 75 feet above the rail below it and 90 feet above the water. This
location is a specimen of excellent railroad engineering. The length
of line shown in the figure, including the spiral, is 8½ miles, and it
cost $265,000 per mile exclusive of the bridges.

=263. Tunnel-loop Location, Rhætian Railways, Switzerland.=—In Figs.
8 and 9 are shown two portions of the Albula branch of the Rhætian
Railways, Canton Graubünden, southeastern Switzerland. The line
connects the valleys of the Albula and the Inn, the former being one of
the branches of the Rhine and the latter of the Danube; it therefore
cuts the divide between the watersheds of those two rivers. It is a
3.28-feet gauge single-track road, and is built largely for tourist
traffic, as the scenic properties of the line are remarkable.

The maximum grade on this line is 3.5 per cent. Over one portion of the
line 7.8 miles long one third of that distance is in tunnel and 15 per
cent of it on viaducts. The radii of the centre lines of the tunnels
are 460 and 394 feet, while the lengths of the tunnels range from 1591
to 2250 feet, with a maximum grade in them of 3 per cent. The weight of
rails used is 50 pounds per yard on grades of 2.5 per cent or less, but
for heavier grades 55-pound rails are employed. The cross-ties are of
mild steel and weigh 80 pounds each except in the long Albula tunnel,
where treated oak ties are used as being better adapted to the special
conditions existing there. It will be observed that in each case the
line rises from the left-hand portion of the figure toward the right.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

The tunnels are represented by broken lines, and they are in every
instance on circular curves. Fig. 9 represents the line running from
a point on the east side of the Albula River through a heavy cut and
then across the valley of the Albula into a tunnel 2250 feet long.
The line then runs chiefly in cuts to a point where there are two
tunnels, one over the other; indeed the line over-laps itself in loops
and tunnels a number of times in that vicinity. That portion of the
road shown in Fig. 8 is less remarkable than the other, although it
exhibits extraordinary alignment. This example of railroad location
is one of the most striking among those yet completed. It would
appear to indicate that no topographical difficulties are too great
to be overcome by the civil engineer in railroad location in a most
rugged and precipitous country. Obviously such a line could not be
economically operated for heavy freight traffic.

Railroad lines frequently lead through mountainous regions affording
some of the grandest scenery in the world accessible to the travelling
public. In this country the Canadian Pacific, the Northern Pacific, the
Great Northern, and the Rio Grande Western probably exhibit the most
remarkable instances of this kind.




CHAPTER XXII.


=264. Railroad Signalling.=—The birth of the art of railroad signalling
was probably coexistent with that of the railroad. At the very outset
of the movement of railroad trains it became imperative to insure to
a given train the sole use of the single track at schedule periods.
Both head-to-head and rear-end collisions were liable to occur on main
tracks, as well as false meetings at branches and cross-overs.

=265. The Pilot Guard.=—One of the earliest if not the earliest
of systematic procedures in England to accomplish the safe use of
a railroad track involved the employment of the “pilot guard” on
single-track roads. The pilot was an employé whose duty it was to
accompany every train over a stated section of the line. The authority
to start trains was lodged in him. When it became necessary to start
two or three trains from the same point and in the same direction, it
was also his duty to issue to each train conductor what was called a
pilot ticket, equivalent to a modern train order to run the train over
the section under his control. In that case he was obliged to accompany
the last train to the other end of his section, and no more trains
could move over that section in the same direction until his return
to his first station. As no train could pass over the section without
either him or his pilot ticket, it is clear that the system could
prevent head-to-head collisions, but in itself it is not sufficient to
eliminate rear-end collisions. This system is still employed in Great
Britain on some short branch lines.

=266. The Train-Staff.=—Another method nearly as old as the preceding
is that of the train-staff, used in an improved form at the present
time on some single-track roads. No train under this system can
pass over any given section of the line unless it carries the staff
belonging to that section, the staff being a piece of wood or metal 1
to 1¼ inches in diameter and 18 to 20 inches long. In order to cover
the case of two or more trains starting in the same direction at one
end of a section before running a train in the opposite direction,
tickets were issued, the staff being taken by the last train. The
proper operation of this method, like that of the preceding, would
prevent head-to-head collisions, but is not sufficient in itself to
prevent one train running into the rear of another while both are
proceeding in the same direction in the same section.

=267. First Basis of Railroad Signalling.=—These and other similar
systems answered fairly well the more simple requirements of early
railroad operation. Strictly speaking they are not methods of
signalling, although it may be said that each train is a signal in
itself. With the development of railroad business it was found that
other methods better adapted to a more efficient and rapid movement
of trains were imperative. It was in response to the advancing
requirements of the railroad business that the first approach to
what is now so well known as the block system of signalling was made
in 1842. An English engineer, subsequently, Sir W. F. Cooke, stated
the following sound principles as to the basis of efficient railroad
signalling:

“Every point of a line is a dangerous point which ought to be covered
by signals. The whole distance ought to be divided into sections, and
at the end as well as at the beginning of them there ought to be a
signal, by means of which the entrance to the section is open to each
train when we are sure that it is free. As these sections are too long
to be worked by a traction rod, they ought to be worked by electricity.”

The main features of railroad signalling, as thus set forth, have
continued to characterize the development of the block system from
that early day to the present. The electrical application to which
reference is made in the preceding quotation was that of the needle,
which by its varying position could indicate either “line clear” or
“line blocked.” In 1851 electric bells were used in railroad signalling
on the Southeastern Railway of England. Various other developments were
completed from time to time in Great Britain until the Sykes system
of block signalling was patented in 1875. One of the main features of
the system, and perhaps the most prominent, was the control of the
track signals at the entrance end of the block by the signalman at the
advance end. He exerted this control by electrically operated locks.
About 1876 the Pennsylvania Railroad introduced the block system into
the United States, which has since been greatly developed in a number
of different forms, and its use has been widely extended over many if
not most of the great railroad systems of the country. It is not only
used for the movement of trains, but also for the protection of such
special danger-points as switches, cross-overs, junctions, drawbridges,
heavy descending grades, sharp curves, and other points needing the
protection which a well-designed block system affords.

=268. Code of American Railway Association.=—The code of the American
Railway Association gives the following definitions among others
pertaining to the block system:

_Block._—A length of track of defined limits, the use of which by
trains is controlled by block signals.

_Block Station._—The office from which block signals are operated.

_Block Signal._—A fixed signal controlling the use of a block.

_Home Block Signal._—A fixed signal at the entrance of a block to
control trains in entering and using said block.

_Distant Block Signal._—A fixed signal of distinctive character used in
connection with a home block signal to regulate the approach thereto.

_Advance Block Signal._—A fixed signal placed in advance of a home
block signal to provide a supplementary block between the home block
signal and the advance block signal.

_Block System._—A series of consecutive blocks controlled by block
signals.

_Telegraph Block System._—One in which the signals are operated
manually upon telegraphic information.

_Controlled-Manual Block System._—One in which the signals are operated
manually, and by its construction requires the co-operation of a
signalman at both ends of the block to display a clear signal.

_Automatic Block System._—One in which the signals are operated by
electric, pneumatic, or other agency, actuated by a train or by certain
conditions affecting the use of a block.

=268a. The Block.=—It is seen by these definitions that what may be
called the unit in railroad signalling is the “block”; it may be of
almost any length from a few hundred feet to 6 or 8 miles, or even
more. On a single-track railroad it may evidently extend from one side
track or passing-place to another. Over portions of lines carrying
heavy traffic it may be a half-mile or less. The length of block will
depend, then, upon the intensity and kind of traffic, the physical
features of the line, such as curvature, grade, sidings, cross-overs,
and other similar features, the location, whether in cities, towns, or
open country, as well as upon other elements affecting conditions of
operation which it is desirable to attain.

=269. Three Classes of Railroad Signals—The Disc.=—The signals used
in railroad operation may mainly be divided into three classes:
semaphores, banners, and discs. In general they may convey information
by form, position, and color. The disc is used by causing it to appear
and disappear before an aperture, usually a little larger than itself,
in a case standing perhaps 10 or 12 feet high alongside the track, and
is admirably typified in the Hall electric signal. On account of its
shape, the case in which the disc is operated is frequently called
the banjo, as it is quite similar in shape to that musical instrument
placed in a vertical position, the key end resting on the ground.

=270. The Banner Signal.=—The banner signal is usually operated by
rotation about a vertical axis, frequently in connection with switches.
Its full face painted red, exposed with its plane at right angles to
the track, indicates “danger” or “stop.” With its face turned parallel
to the track, showing only its edge to approaching trains, a “clear”
line or “safety” is indicated.

In the present development of railroad signalling the banner and disc
patterns have a comparatively limited application, although, on the
whole, they are largely used. The banner signal is mostly employed in
the manual operation of switches, turn-outs, and cross-overs, and for
other local purposes, particularly on lines of light traffic.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.—Semaphore Signals.]

=271. The Semaphore.=—The semaphore is now mainly used in connection
with block signalling. Like many other appliances in railroad
signalling it was first used in England, by Mr. C. H. Gregory, about
1841. Its name is derived from the combination of two Greek words
signifying a sign-bearer. It consists of a post varying in height
from about 3 to 35 or 40 feet, carrying an arm at its top from 3 to
5 feet long, pivoted within a foot or 18 inches of one end, the long
end suitably shaped and painted and the other arranged with a lens so
that when operated at night in connection with a lamp it may exhibit a
properly colored light. The post of the semaphore is placed alongside
the track so as to be on the right-hand side of an approaching train,
the long arm rising and falling as a signal away from the track and in
a plane at right angles to it. The other arm of the semaphore signal
may be connected by wires or rods and light chains running over pulleys
with suitable levers and weights operated either in a near-by signal
cabin or by a signalman stationed near the semaphore itself; or it may
be operated by electric or pneumatic power, as in many of the later
installations. The semaphore may, therefore, be operated at the post or
by suitable appliances at a distance.

[Illustration: Semaphore on Pennsylvania Railroad.]

=272. Colors for Signalling.=—The colors used either for painted
signals for daylight exposure or for coloring lenses for night
signalling are red, white, and green, as ordinarily employed in
this country; red signifying “danger” or “stop,” white signifying
“safety” or “clear track,” and green signifying “caution” or “proceed
with train under control,” indicating that a train may go forward
cautiously, expecting to find an obstruction or occupied track. In
England green is largely employed to indicate “safety” or “clear
track,” on the ground that a white light is so similar to any other in
its vicinity that the latter may too easily be mistaken for a signal.
While there is some diversity of views in this country on that point,
the consensus of engineering opinion seems to favor the retention of
the white for the track safety signal.

=273. Indications of the Semaphore.=—It is evident that a semaphore
affords facilities of form, position, and color in its use for the
purpose of signalling. The horizontal position is the most striking
for the semaphore arm, as it then extends at right angles to the post
and to the right or away from the track; this position is, therefore,
taken to indicate “danger” or “stop.” No train may, therefore, proceed
against a horizontal semaphore arm.

It might at first sight appear that the vertical position of the
semaphore arm close against the post could be taken to indicate
“safety” or “clear track” or “proceed,” but experience has shown that
such a position may be injudicious, except under special conditions
where it has lately been employed to make that indication. If the
semaphore arm should be knocked or blown from the ordinary post,
the engineman of an approaching train probably would not be able to
detect the actual condition of things and might accept the appearance
of the semaphore as indicating a clear line, thus justifying himself
in proceeding at full speed, while the signalman in his cabin might
have placed the signal at “danger.” A position of the semaphore arm,
therefore, at an angle of 65° or 70° below the horizontal is usually
taken as a safety signal. This position is in marked contrast to the
horizontal arm and at the same time makes the absence of the semaphore
arm impossible without immediate detection from an approaching
locomotive. After dark the semaphore in a position of danger exhibits
a red light through the lens in its short arm when the long arm is at
the “danger” position or horizontal. Similarly, when the long arm is in
the safety position a white light is exhibited through the lens in the
shorter arm, so that the respective conditions of clear or obstructed
track are made evident to the engineman as well by night as by day on
his approach to the semaphore.

In some of the latest signal work three positions of the semaphore
arm on one post, known as three-position block signalling, have been
employed. In this system a special post, frequently on a signal bridge
over the track, permits the vertical position of the semaphore arm
to indicate “clear track,” while the diagonal or inclined position
below the horizontal indicates “caution.” In the Mozier three-position
signal a diagonal or inclined position above the horizontal indicates
“caution” an addition to the two usual positions of “stop” and “clear.”

These are the elements, so to speak, of railroad signalling at the
present day. They are combined with various appliances and in various
sequences, so as to express all the varied conditions of the track
structure which affect the operation of the road or the movement of
trains upon it. These combinations and the appliances employed in them
are more or less involved in their principal features and complicated
in their details, although the main principles and salient points are
simple and may easily be exhibited as to their mode of operation and
general results. In this treatment of the subject it will only be
possible to accomplish these general purposes without attempting to set
forth the mechanical details by which the main purposes of railroad
signalling are accomplished.

=274. General Character of Block System.=—It is evident from what has
already been stated that the block system of signalling involves the
use of fixed signals located so as to convey promptly to approaching
trains certain information as to the condition of points of danger
approached. Furthermore, this system of signals is designed and
operated on the assumption that every point is to be considered as a
danger-point until information is given that a condition of safety
exists. The usual position of signals, or what may be called the normal
position, is that of “danger,” and no position of “safety” is to be
given to any signal except to permit a train to pass into a block whose
condition of safety or clear track is absolutely assured. These are
the ground principles on which the signal systems to be considered are
designed and operated, although there are some conditions under which
the normal signal position may be that of safety.

=275. Block Systems in Use.=—The block systems now in general use are:

The Manual, in which the signals at each end of each block are wholly
controlled and operated by the signalman at each signal point.

The Controlled-Manual, in which the signals at the entrance to each
block are controlled either electrically or in some other manner by
the signalman at the other extremity of that block, but are operated
subject to that control by the signalman at the entrance of the block.

The Auto-Manual, in which the signals are generally operated and
controlled as in the Manual or Controlled-Manual, except that they are
automatically returned to the danger position as the rear car of a
moving train passes them.

The Automatic, in which the operation of the signals is wholly
automatic and generally by electricity, or by a combination of electric
and pneumatic mechanism. In this system no signalmen are required.

The Machine, which is a controlled block system for single-track
operation and in which machines operated electrically with detachable
parts, as staffs, are employed in connection with other fixed signals
alongside the track.

The main features of these various systems of blocking are, in
respect to their signalling, the same, but the means for actuating or
manipulating the signals and the conditions under which moving trains
receive the necessary instructions are different. They all have the
same main objects in view of improving railroad operation by enhancing
both safety and facility of train movement.

“Absolute” blocking is that system of block signalling which absolutely
prevents one train passing into a block until the preceding train is
entirely out of it, or, in other words, until the block is absolutely
clear.

“Permissive” blocking is, strictly speaking, the violation of the true
block system of signalling, since under it a train may under certain
precautionary conditions enter a block before the preceding train has
passed out of it.

=276. Locations of Signals.=—In proceeding to locate signals along a
railroad line it is imperative to recognize the preceding purposes
as controlling motives. Signals must be seen readily and clearly in
order to be of the greatest service to the enginemen of approaching
trains, and their positions must be selected with that end in view.
Locations of switches, cross-overs, junctions, and other similar track
features will control the locations of the signals which are to protect
them. The main or home signal in these special cases may usually be
placed from 50 to 200 feet from the point which is to be governed, the
so-called “distant” signal being placed about 2000 feet for level track
back of the main or home signal.

=277. Home, Distant, and Advance Signals.=—A complete system of signals
employed in blocking includes first of all the so-called “home” signal
at each extremity of a block, then at a distance of 2000 to 2500 feet
back from the home signal is placed the “distant” signal. The latter
is thus approached and passed before reaching the home signal. On the
other side of the “home” signal at least a maximum train length into
a block about to be entered by a moving train is placed the “advance”
signal. The distance of the advance signal from the home signal may
be 1500 to 2500 feet. As a moving train approaches the end of a
block it first meets the distant signal, the purpose of which is to
indicate what the engineman may expect to find at the home signal. If
the distant signal is in the danger position, he will pass it with
caution and place his train under control so as to be able to stop at
the home signal. If he finds the distant signal in a safety position,
indicating the same position of the home signal, he may approach the
latter without reducing speed, confident that the next section is clear
and ready for him. The advance signal forms a kind of secondary or
supplementary block into which the train, under certain conditions,
may enter when the block in which it is found is obstructed, but no
train may pass the advance signal unless the entire block is clear
except when, under permissive working, the train proceeds with caution,
expecting to find the track either obstructed or occupied. This group
of three signals—the distant, the home, and the advance—taken in
the order in which the moving train finds them, is located at each
extremity of the block. Although the home signal is said to control the
movement of trains in a block at the entrance to which it is found, as
a matter of fact it appears that the advance signal in the final event
holds that control.

=278. Typical Working of Auto-Controlled Manual System.=—The mode of
employing these signals can be illustrated in a typical way by the
diagrams, Figs, 11, 12, and 13, which exhibit in a skeleton manner
Pattenall’s improved Sykes system which belongs to the Auto-Controlled
Manual class. In these figures the end of block 1, the whole of blocks
2 and 3, and the beginning of block 4 are shown. Stations _A_, _B_,
and _C_ indicate the extremities of blocks. The signals _S_, _Sʹ_,
and _S″_ are the home signals, while _D_, _Dʹ_, and _D″_ indicate
distant signals, and _A_, _Aʹ_, and _A″_ advance signals. As the
diagrams indicate, the stretch of double-track road is represented
with east- and west-bound tracks. In order to simplify the diagrams,
signals and stations are shown for one track only; they would simply
be duplicated for the other track. The signal cabin is supposed to be
located at each station, and at that cabin are found the levers and
other appliances for working the signals operated there, the signals
themselves being exposed alongside the track. In each signal cabin
there is an indicator, as shown at _I_, _Iʹ_, and _I″_. On the face
of each indicator there are two slots, shown opposite the lines _E_
and _F_. In the upper of these slots appears either the word “Clear”
or “Blocked.” In the lower slot appears either the word “Passed” or
“On.” The significance of these words will appear presently. On this
indicator face at _P_, _Pʹ_, and _P″_ are located electric push-buttons
called plungers. The operation of the levers indicated at _L_, the
counterweights _d_, and the locking detail _l_ are evident from an
inspection of the figure, and need no special explanation. It is only
necessary to state that the locking-device _l_ holds the bar _bc_ until
it is released at the proper time, and that the counterweight may then
return the lever from its extreme leftward position to that at the
extreme right, at the same time placing the semaphore arm _S_ in the
position of danger. It is particularly important to bear in mind this
last observation. The counterweight is the feature of the system which
always holds the semaphore arm in the position of danger, making that
its normal position, except when it is put to safety for the passing of
a train.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

[Illustration: FIG. 12.]

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

If a westward train is represented in Fig. 11 at _T_ as approaching
station _A_ to enter the block 2, both the distant signal _D_ and
the home signal _S_ being at danger, the system is so arranged that
the signalman at station _A_ cannot change those signals, i.e., to a
position of safety, until the signalman at station _B_ permits him to
do so. If the signalman at station _A_ desires to open block 2 for
the entrance of the train _T_, he asks the signalman at station _B_
by wire to release the lock _l_ to enable him to do so. If there is
no train in block 2, the signalman at station _B_ pushes the button
_P′_ or “plunges” it. This raises the lock _l_ at station _A_ and the
signalman immediately pulls the lever _L_ to its extreme leftward
position, throwing both the signals _S_ and _D_ to the position of
safety or clear, indicated by the dotted lines at _S_². At the same
time the indicator _E_ at station _A_ shows the words “Clear to _B_,”
while the slot _Fʹ_ at _B_ shows the words “On from _A_.” The signals
at stations _B_ and _C_ are supposed to be in their normal position of
danger, and the indicator _E′_ at station _B_ shows the words “Blocked
to _C_.” The home and distant signals _Sʹ_ and _Dʹ_ are now at danger,
but the train _T_ may enter block 2 and proceeds to do so, it being
remembered that the signalman at station _A_ cannot move the lever _L_,
as it has passed out of his control; not even the signalman at station
_B_ can give him power to do so. The train _T_ now passes station _A_
into block 2. As the last car passes over the point _G_ its wheels
strike what is called a track-treadle, an appliance having electrical
connection with the lock _l_. The effect of the wheels of the last car
of the train passing over the treadle at _G_ is to release lock _l_,
enabling the signalman at station _A_ immediately to raise the arms _S_
and _D_ to the position of danger. It is to be observed that he cannot
do this until the entire train has passed into block 2; nor, since his
plunger is locked by the same treadle at _G_, can he signal “Safety” or
“Clear” to the entrance of block 1. Hence no train can enter block 1 to
collide with the rear end of the train just entering block 2. When the
signalman at station _A_ has raised his signal _S_ to danger, it again
passes out of his control, indeed out of both his control and that of
the signalman at _B_, until the last car of the train passes over the
treadle _Gʹ_ at the entrance of block 3.

The train has now passed into block 2 and is approaching station _B_.
The signalman at _B_ asks _C_ by wire to release the lever _Lʹ_, and if
block 3 is clear, _C_ plunges at _P″_.

_C_ then throws his lever _Lʹ_ so as to place the home and distant
signals _Sʹ_ and _Dʹ_ at safety. The condition of things will then be
shown by Fig. 12. As soon as the last car of the train has passed over
the treadle at _Gʹ_ his lever _Lʹ_ will be released and he can then
throw the lever to the danger position, raising the home and distant
signals _Sʹ_ and _Dʹ_ to the horizontal. After the danger position is
assumed by the home signal _Sʹ_, as well as the distant signal _Dʹ_, he
has no power over them until the signalman at station _C_ confers it on
him by plunging the button _P″_.

While the train has been in block 2, the indicator _Iʹ_ has shown
“Blocked to _C_” and “Train on from _A_,” but as the train passes _B_
the indicator reads “Blocked to _C_” and “Train passed from _A_,”
while the indicator _I″_ at _C_ reads “Blocked to _D_” and “Train on
from _B_.” This condition of the signals and trains is shown by Fig.
13. Also, when the last car passes over the treadle _Gʹ_, but not till
then, _B_ may permit _A_ to admit a train to enter block 2 should _A_
so desire. Finally, when the train approaches _C_, the signalman at
that point asks _D_ to enable him to permit the train to enter block 4,
and _C_ confers the power by plunging if that block is clear. Fig. 13
exhibits the corresponding signals at _C_.

This sequence of operations is typical of what takes place in this
particular block signal system at the limits of every successive block,
and differs only in details characteristic of this system from those
which are performed in any other block signal system.

=279. General Results.=—It is seen first that no signalman can operate
a signal until the condition in the block ahead of him is such as to
make it proper for him to do so, and then he can only indicate what
is necessary for the safe entrance of the train into that block.
Furthermore, immediately on the passage of the train past his home
signal he must put the latter to danger or the counterweight may do it
for him, the train itself when in a safe position having conferred the
requisite power upon him. The signalman at the advance end of the block
always knows when the train is about to enter it, for he is obliged
to give his permission for that entrance. His indicator shows this
result, and will continue to show it until the train passes out of the
block. It is to be observed that the upper openings marked _E_ on the
indicator give information of the condition of the block in advance,
while the lower openings give information of the block in the rear.

It is particularly important to notice that after the signalman at the
advance end of a block has “plunged” his plunger remains locked and it
cannot be released until the train admitted to the block covered by
the plunger has completely passed out of that block, permitting the
track-treadle at the entrance to the next block to unlock the plunger.
This feature makes it impossible for one train to enter a block until
the preceding train has passed out of it.

If the permissive system of using a block be employed, in which the
train is permitted to enter that block before a preceding train leaves
it, the treadle gives no protection against a rear-end collision with
the first train. In such an exigency other devices must be used or the
following train must proceed cautiously, expecting to find the track
occupied.

=280. Distant Signals.=—Thus far the distant signals have been
treated incidentally only. They may be operated concurrently with
or independently of the home signal in such a way that if danger is
indicated, the distant signal gives its indication prior to that of the
home signal. In this manner protection is given to the rear of a train
approaching a block against the home signal set at “danger.” After the
obstruction is removed and the block cleared, the home signal is set at
“safety” before the distant signal is cleared.

=281. Function of Advance Signals.=—The advance signals are used when
for any purpose it is desired to form a short block in a regular block.
If, for instance, block 3 in Fig. 11 were obstructed by a train stopped
by some failure of a locomotive detail, a train approaching station _B_
in section 2 against the home signal _Sʹ_ set at “danger” would be
obliged to stop before entering block 3. It might then be permitted to
enter the latter block, to be stopped by the advance signal _Aʹ_ set at
“danger” or under instructions to pass it cautiously, expecting to find
the track obstructed. It is thus seen that the advance signal creates
what may be called an emergency block, and in reality finally controls
the movement of trains in the block in which it is located. It would
never be cleared unless the home signal were first cleared, nor would
it be set at “danger” unless the home signal gave the same indication.

The preceding operation of the block system of signalling controls the
movement of trains along a double-track line.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

=282. Signalling at a Single-track Crossing.=—A somewhat similar
sequence of signal operations controls train movements at a crossing,
whether single- or double-track. Fig. 14 illustrates the use of
signals required for the safe movement of trains at a single-track
railroad crossing, which is supposed to be that of a north-and-south
line crossing obliquely an east-and-west line. Precisely the same
arrangement of signals operated in the same manner would be required
if the crossing were at the angle of 90°. The signal cabin is placed,
as shown, as near as practicable to the actual intersection of tracks.
Trains may pass in either direction on either track, but in every
case they would be governed by the signals at the right-hand side of
the track as seen by the engineman. There will therefore be a set of
signals on both sides of each track, each set governing the movement
of trains in its own direction. Each home signal may be placed about
350 feet from the actual intersection, and each distant signal 1200
to 1500 feet from the home signal, or 1550 feet to 1800 feet from the
intersection. Each advance signal must be at least as far in advance
of the home signal as the maximum length of train, since it may be
used to stop a train, the rear car of which should completely pass the
home signal. In their normal positions every home signal should be set
at “danger,” carrying with them the distant signals giving the same
indication. The advance signals must also indicate “danger” with the
home signal. No train can then pass the crossing until the home and
distant signals indicate a clear line for it, the other signals at the
crossing, except possibly the advance signal, being set at “danger.”
If for any reason it is desired to hold the train after it is entirely
free of the crossing, the advance signal would also indicate “danger.”

It is thus seen that if the signals are properly set and obeyed, it is
impossible for two trains to attempt a crossing at the same time. It is
not an uncommon occurrence, however, for an engineman to run his train
against the danger signal, and in order to make it impossible for the
train to reach the crossing even under these circumstances a derailing
device is used. This derailing arrangement is shown in Fig. 14, about
300 feet from the crossing, although it may be placed from 300 to 500
feet from that point. Its purpose is to derail any train attempting
to make the crossing against the danger signal. The operation of the
derail is evident from the skeleton lines of the figure. When the home
signal is at danger the movable part of the derailing device is at this
point turned so as to catch the flanges of the wheels as they attempt
to pass it. The train is thus thrown upon the cross-ties at such a
distance from the crossing as will produce a stop before reaching it.
When the home signal is at safety the derail operated with the signal
is closed and the line is continuous. This combination of signals and
derail coacting serves efficiently to prevent collisions at crossings,
although trains may be occasionally derailed in accomplishing that end.
The preceding explanations of the use of signals and derail apply to
a train that may approach the crossing in either direction on either
track, as is obvious from an inspection of the diagram itself.

=283. Signalling at a Double-track Crossing.=—In the case of a
double-track crossing, the arrangement of signals and derails is
precisely the same as for a single-track crossing, each set of signals
shown in Fig. 15 covering one track. In other words, the line of single
track is to take the place of each rail with its set of signals in
that figure. There will be but four derails, one for each track only
on the approach to the crossing. The working of the signals with the
derails is precisely the same as has already been explained for the
single-track crossing.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

=284. Signalling for Double-track Junction and Cross-over.=—Fig. 16
represents a skeleton diagram of signals required for a junction of
two double-track roads and a cross-over. This arrangement covers the
use of switches. The location of signals and signal cabin as shown is
self-explanatory, after what has already been stated in connection with
single- and double-track crossings. It will be observed that the home
signals for both the west-bound main and branch tracks are identical
in location, and are shown by the solid double flag, the distant
signal being shown by its notched end at a considerable distance back
of the double home signal. It will, furthermore, be observed that
at each home signal there is a derailing-switch interlocked, in the
lock-and-block system presently to be explained, with the home signals
operated simultaneously with them. If, therefore, an engineman attempts
to run his train past a home signal set at danger, the result will be
the derailment of his train, thus brought to rest before it can make
any collision with another. It is obvious in this case that if the
switches from the main to the branch tracks or at the extremities of
the cross-over are worked independently, they must be operated directly
in connection with the signals. For complete protection they should be
interlocked with the signals so that it would be impossible to clear
any signal without simultaneously setting the switches consistently
with those signals. The diagram exhibits clearly the indications which
must be made in order to effect any desired train movement at such a
junction of tracks.

=285. General Observations.=—Similar arrangements of signals, derails,
or switches must be made wherever switches, cross-overs, and junctions
are found, the detailed variations of those signals and switches being
made to meet the individual requirements of each local case. The
combinations of switches and switch-signals frequently become very
complicated in yards where the tracks are numerous and the combinations
exceedingly varied, in order to meet the conditions created by the
movement of trains into and out of the yard.

The preceding explanations are intended only to give a clear idea
of the main features of signalling, in order to secure the highest
degree of safety and facility in the movement of trains over a modern
railroad. While they exhibit the external or apparent combinations of
signals for that purpose, they do not touch in detail and scarcely
in general upon the mechanical appliances found in the signal cabin
and along the tracks required to accomplish the necessary signal
movements. The considerations in detail of those appliances would cover
extended examinations of purely mechanical, electrical, pneumatic, and
electro-pneumatic combinations too involved to be set forth in any but
the most extended and careful study. They have at the present time been
brought to a wonderful degree of mechanical perfection and afford a
field of most interesting and profitable study, into which, however, it
is not possible in these general statements of the subject to enter.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.]

=286. Interlocking-machines.=—The earliest machine perfected for
use in this department of railroad signalling was the Saxby and
Farmer interlocking-machine, first brought out in England and
subsequently introduced in this country between 1874 and 1876. This
machine has been much improved since and has been widely used. Other
interlocking-machines have also been devised and used in this country
in connection with the most improved systems of signalling, until
at the present time a high degree of mechanical excellence has been
reached.

The interlocking-machine in what is called the lock-and-block system of
signalling is designed to operate signals, or signals in connection
with switches, derailing-points, or other dangerous track features, so
as to make it impossible for a signalman to make a wrong combination,
that is, a combination in which the signals will induce the engineman
to run his train into danger. The signals and switches or other track
details are so connected and interlocked with each other as to form
certain desired combinations by the movement of designated levers in
the signal cabin or tower. These combinations are predetermined in
the design and connections of the appliances used, and they cannot
be changed when once made except by design or by breakage of the
parts; they cannot be deranged by any action of the signalman. He
may delay trains by awkward or even wrong movement of levers, but he
cannot actually clear his signals for the movement of a train without
simultaneously giving that train a clear and safe track. As has been
stated, he cannot organize an accident. Figs. 17 and 18 show banks or
series of levers belonging to interlocking-machines. As is evident
from these figures, the levers are numerous if the machine operates
the switches and signals of a large yard, for the simple reason
that a great many combinations must be made in order to meet the
requirements of train movements in such a yard. The signalman, however,
makes himself acquainted with the various combinations requisite for
outgoing and incoming trains and the possible movements required
for the shifting or hauling out of empty trains. He has before him
diagrams showing in full the lever movements which must be made for
the accomplishment of any or of all these movements, and he simply
follows the directions of the diagrams and his instructions in the
performance of his duty. He cannot derange the combinations, although
he may be slow in reaching them. The locking-frame which compels him
to make a clear track whenever his signals give a clear indication
to the engineman lies below the lower end of the levers seen in the
figures. The short arms of the levers carry tappets with notches
in their edges into which fit pointed pieces of metal or dogs; the
arrangement of these notches and dogs is such as to make the desired
combinations and no others. It will be observed that a spring-latch
handle projects from a point near the upper end of each lever where
the latter is grasped in operating the machine. This spring-latch
handle must be pressed close to the lever before the latter can be
moved. The pressing of the spring-latch handle against the lever
effects a suitable train of unlocking before which the lever cannot
be moved and after which it is thrown over to the full limit and
locked there. The desired combination for the movement of the train
through any number of switches may require a similar movement of a
number of levers, but the entire movement of that set, as required,
must be completely effected before the signals are cleared, and when
they are so cleared the right combination forming a clear track for
the train, and that one only, is secured. These meagre and superficial
statements indicate in a general way, however imperfectly, the ends
attained in a modern interlocking-machine. They secure for railroad
traffic as nearly as possible an absolutely safe track. They eliminate,
as far as it is possible to do so, the inefficiency of human nature,
the erratic, indifferent, or wilfully negligent features of human
agency, and substitute therefor the certainty of efficient mechanical
appliances. In some and perhaps many States grade crossings are
required by statute to adopt measures that are equivalent to the most
advanced lock-and-block system of signalling. So vast has become
railroad traffic upon the great trunk lines of the country that it
would be impossible to operate them at all without the perfected modern
systems of railroad signalling. They constitute the means by which all
train movements are controlled, and without such systems great modern
railroads could not be operated.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.]

The swiftly moving “limited” express passenger trains, equipped with
practically every luxury of modern life, speed their way so swiftly
and smoothly over many hundreds of miles without the incident of an
interruption, and in such a regular and matter-of-fact way, that the
suggestion of an intricate system of signalling governing its movements
is never thought of. Yet such a train moves not a yard over its track
without the saving authority of its block signals. If the engineman
were to neglect even for a mile the indication of the semaphore, he
would place in fatal peril the safety of his train and of every life in
it.

=287. Methods of Applying Power in Systems of Signalling.=—The
mechanical appliances used in accomplishing these ends are among the
most efficient in character and delicate yet certain in motive power
which engineering science has yet produced. The electric circuit formed
by the rails of the track plays a most important part, particularly in
securing the safety of the rear of the train in making it absolutely
certain whether even rear cars that may have broken away have either
passed out of the block or are still in it. The electric circuit in one
application or another was among the earliest means used in railroad
signalling. Electric power is also used in connection with compressed
air for the working of signals. Among the latest and perhaps the most
advanced types of lock-and-block signalling is that which is actuated
by low-pressure compressed air, the maximum pressure being 15 pounds
only per square inch. The compressed air is supplied by a simple
compressor, and it is communicated from the signal cabin to the most
remote signal or switch by pipes and suitable cylinders fitted with
pistons controlled by valves, thus effecting the final signal or switch
movements. It has been successfully applied at the yard of the Grand
Central Station in New York City and at many other similar points. In
this connection it is interesting to observe that while the original
Saxby and Farmer interlocking-machine was installed from England in
this country, as has already been observed, about 1875, American
engineers have within a year reciprocated the favor by furnishing and
putting in place most successfully in one of the great railroad yards
of London the first low-pressure pneumatic lock-and-block system[8]
found in Great Britain.

[8] By Standard Railroad Signal Company of Troy, N. Y.

=288. Train-staff Signalling.=—The lock-and-block system gives
the highest degree of security attainable at the present time for
double-track railroad traffic, but the simpler character of the
single-track railroad business can be advantageously controlled by a
somewhat simpler and less expensive system, which is a modification
of the old train-staff method. It is one of the “machine” methods of
signalling. The type which has been used widely in England, Australia
and India, and to some extent in this country is called the Webb and
Thompson train-staff machine, shown in Fig. 19. It will be observed
that the machine contains ten staffs (18 to 20 inches long and 1 to 1¼
inches in diameter), but as many as fifteen are sometimes used. These
staffs can be removed from the machine at one end of a section of the
road at which a train is to enter, only by permission from the operator
at the farther end of the section. If the station at the entrance to
that section is called _A_, and the station at the farther end _X_, the
following description of the operation of the instrument is given by
Mr. Charles Hansel in a very concise and excellent manner:

[Illustration: FIG. 19.—Webb and Thompson Train-staff Machine.]

“When a train is ready to move from _A_ to _X_ the operator at _A_
presses down the lever which is seen at the bottom of the right-hand
dial, sounding one bell at _X_, which is for the purpose of calling
the attention of the operator at _X_ to the fact that _A_ desires to
send a train forward. The operator at _X_ acknowledges the call by
pressing the lever on his instrument, sounding a bell in the tower at
_A_. The operator at _A_ then asks permission from _X_ to withdraw
staff by pressing down the lever before mentioned three times, giving
three rings on the bell at _X_, and immediately turns his right-hand
pointer to the left, leaving it in the horizontal position pointing to
the words ‘For staff,’ indicating that he desires operator at _X_ to
release his instrument so that he can take a staff or train order from
it. If there is no train or any portion of a train between _A_ and _X_,
the holding down of the lever at _X_ closes the circuit in the lock
magnets at _A_, which enables the operator at _A_ to withdraw a staff.
As soon as this staff is removed from _A_, _A_ turns the left-hand
pointer to the words ‘Staff out,’ and in removing this staff from the
instrument _A_ the galvanometer needle which is seen in the centre
of the instrument between the two dials vibrates, indicating to the
operator at _X_ that _A_ has withdrawn his staff. _X_ then releases
the lever which he has held down in order that _A_ might withdraw a
staff and turns his left-hand indicator to ‘Staff out,’ and with this
position of the instrument a staff cannot be withdrawn from either one.

“The first method of delivering this staff to the engineer as a train
order was to place it in a staff-crane, which crane was located on the
platform outside of the block station. With the staff in this position
it has been found in actual practice that the engineman can pick it up
while his train is running at a speed of 30 miles per hour. A second
staff cannot be removed from _A_ nor a staff removed from _X_ until
this staff which was taken by the engineman in going from _A_ to _X_
is placed in the staff instrument at _X_; consequently the delivering
of a staff from _A_ to the engineman gives him absolute control of the
section between _A_ and _X_.

“This train order staff also controls all switches leading from the
main line between _A_ and _X_, for with the style of switch-stand which
we have designed for the purpose the trainman cannot open the switch
until he has secured the staff from the engineman and inserted it in
the switch-stand, and as soon as he throws the switch-lever and opens
the switch he fastens the train-staff in the switch-stand, and it
cannot be removed until the switchman has closed and locked the switch
for the main line. When this is done he may remove the train-staff and
return it to the engineman. It will thus be seen that this train order,
in the shape of a staff, gives the engineman absolute control over the
section, and also insures that all switches from the main line are set
properly before he can deliver the train-staff to the instrument at _X_.

“In order that the operator at _X_ may be assured that the entire train
has passed his station, we may divide the staff in two and deliver one
half to the engineman and the other half to the trainman on the caboose
or rear end of the train, and it will be necessary for the operator at
_X_ to have the two halves so that he may complete the staff in order
to insert it into the staff instrument at _X_, as it is impossible to
insert a portion of the staff; it must be entirely complete before it
can be returned to the staff instrument.”

Instead of using the entire staff as a whole or in two parts, Mr.
Hansel suggests that one or more rings on the body of the staff be
removed from the latter and given to the engineman or other trainman to
be placed upon a corresponding staff at the extreme end of the section.
This would answer the purpose, for no staff can be inserted in a
machine unless all the rings are in their proper positions. These rings
can be taken up by a train moving at any speed from a suitable crane at
any point alongside the track.

For a rapid movement of trains on a single-track railroad under this
staff system an engineman must know before he approaches the end of the
section whether the staff is ready for delivery to him. In order to
accomplish that purpose the usual distant and home signals may readily
be employed. The distant signal would show him what to expect, so that
he would approach the entrance to the section either at full speed or
with his train under control according to the indication. Similarly,
electric circuits may be employed in connection with the staff or rings
in the control of signals which it may be desired to employ.

The electric train-staff may also be used in a permissive block system,
the section of the track between stations _A_ and _X_ constituting
the block. In Fig. 19, showing the machine, a horizontal arm is seen
to extend across its face and to the right. This is the permissive
attachment which must be operated by the special staff shown on the
left half of the machine about midway of its height. If it is desired
to run two or three trains or two or three sections of the same train
from _A_ before admitting a train at _X_ in the opposite direction,
the operator at _A_ so advises the operator at _X_. The latter then
permits _A_ to remove the special staff with which the extreme
right-hand end of the permissive attachment is unlocked and a tablet
taken out. This tablet is equivalent to a train order and is given
to the train immediately starting from _A_. A second tablet is given
in a similar manner to the second section or train, and a third to
the third section. The last section of train or train itself starting
from _A_ takes all the remaining tablets and the special staff for
insertion in the machine at _X_. In this manner head-to-head collisions
are prevented when a number of trains are passing through the block
in the same direction before the entrance of a train in the opposite
direction. This system has been found to work satisfactorily where
it has been used in this country, although its use has been quite
limited. Evidently, in itself, it is not sufficient to prevent rear-end
collisions in a block between trains moving in the same direction. In
order to avoid such collisions where a train falls behind its schedule
time or for any reason is stopped in a block, prompt use must be made
of rear flagmen or other means to stop or to control the movement of
the first following train.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.]

The most improved form of high-speed train-staff machine is shown in
Fig. 20, as made and installed by the Union Switch and Signal Company
and used by a number of the largest railroad systems of the United
States. In these machines the staffs are but a few ounces in weight.




CHAPTER XXIII.


=289. Evolution of the Locomotive.=—The evolution of the steam
locomotive may be called the most spectacular portion of the
development of railroad engineering. The enormous engines used at
the present time for hauling both heavy freight and fast passenger
trains possess little in common, in respect of their principal
features, with the crude machines, awkward in appearance and of little
hauling capacity, which were used in the early part of the nineteenth
century in the beginning of railroad operation. The primitive and
ill-proportioned machine, ungainly in the highest degree, designed and
built by Trevithick as far back as 1803, was a true progenitor of the
modern locomotive, although the family resemblance is not at first very
evident. Several such locomotive machines were designed and operated
between 1800 and 1829 when Stevenson’s Rocket was brought out. The
water was carried in a boiler on a wagon immediately behind the engine,
and the steam-cylinder in those early machines was placed almost
anywhere but where it now seems to belong. The Rocket has some general
features of resemblance to the machines built seventy years later, but
when placed side by side it might easily be supposed that seven hundred
years rather than seventy had elapsed between the two productions of
the shop.

After the famous locomotive trial in which Robert Stevenson distanced
his competitors, the design of the locomotive advanced rapidly, and
it was but a few years later when the modern locomotive began to be
accurately foreshadowed in the machines then constructed. This was true
both in England and the United States.

The first steam locomotive in this country is believed to be the
machine built by John Stevens at Hoboken, N. J., in 1825 and operated
in 1825-27. This locomotive has practically the arrangement of boiler
and cylinder which is found upon the modern contractors’ engines used
for pile-driving, hoisting, and similar operations. It would certainly
be difficult to imagine that it had any relation to the great express
and freight locomotives of the present day. The rectilinear motions
of the piston were transformed into the rotary motion of the wheels
by means of gearing consisting of a simple arrangement of cog-wheels.
About the same time a model of an English locomotive called the
Stockton and Darlington No. 1 was brought to the United States by Mr.
William Strickland of Philadelphia. The next important step in American
locomotive development was the construction of the locomotive “John
Bull” for the Camden and Amboy Railroad Company in the English shops
of Stevenson & Company in the years 1830-31. This machine has the
general features, although not the large dimensions, of many modern
locomotives. The cow-catcher is a little more elaborate in design and
far-reaching in its proportions than the similar appendage of the
present day, but the general arrangement of the fire-box and boiler,
the steam-cylinders, the driving-wheels and smoke-stack is quite
similar to a modern American locomotive. This machine, “John Bull,” and
train made the trip from New York City to Chicago and return under its
own steam in 1893. It was one of the prominent features of the World’s
Columbian Exposition. It rests in the National Museum at Washington,
where it is one of the most interesting early remains of mechanical
engineering in this country. One of the cars used in this train was
the original used on the Camden and Amboy Road about 1836. Its body
was used as a chicken-coop at South Amboy, N. J., for many years, and
was rescued from this condition of degradation for the purpose of the
Exposition trip in 1893. The original driving-wheels had locust spokes
and felloes, the hubs and tires being of iron.

The locomotive “George Washington” was built, as a considerable
number have been since, with one driving-axle, and was designed to
be used on heavy grades. This machine was built by William Norris &
Sons of Philadelphia, who were the progenitors of the present great
establishment of the Baldwin Locomotive Works. While the development
of the locomotive was subjected to many vicissitudes in principles,
general arrangement, and size in order to meet the varying requirements
of different roads as well as the fancies or more rational ideas of the
designers, its advance was rapid. As early as 1846 we find practically
the modern consolidation type, followed in 1851 by the ordinary
eight-wheel engine of which thousands have been constructed within
the past fifty years. The first Mogul built by the Baldwin Locomotive
Works was almost if not quite as early in the field. Both these types
of machines carry the principal portion of their weight upon the
driving-wheels and were calculated to yield a high tractive capacity,
especially as the weights of the engines increased. The weight of the
little “John Bull” was but 22,425 pounds, while that of the great
modern machine may be as much as 267,800 pounds, with 53,500 pounds on
a single driving-axle.

=290. Increase of Locomotive Weight and Rate of Combustion of
Fuel.=—The development of railroad business in the United States has
been so rapid as to create rigorous exactions of every feature of a
locomotive calculated to increase its tractive force. Any enhancement
of train-load without increasing the costs of the train force or other
cost of movement will obviously lead to economy in transportation.
In order that the locomotive may yield the correspondingly augmented
tractive force the weight resting upon the drivers must be increased,
which means a greater machine and at the same time higher working
pressures of steam. This demands greater boiler capacity and strength
and a proportionately increased rate of combustion, so as to move the
locomotive and train by the stored-up energy of the fuel transformed in
the engine through steam pressure. The higher that pressure the greater
the amount of energy stored up in a unit of weight of the steam and the
greater will be the capacity of a given amount of water to perform the
work of hauling a train. The greater the weight of train moved and the
greater its speed the more energy must be supplied by the steam, and,
again, that can only be done with a correspondingly greater consumption
of fuel. In the early days of the small and crude machines to which
allusion has already been made the simplest fuel was sufficiently
effective. As the duties performed by the locomotive became more
intense a higher grade of fuel, i.e., one in which a greater amount of
heat energy is stored per unit of weight, was required. Both anthracite
and bituminous coal have admirably filled these requirements. The
movement of a great modern locomotive and its train at an average
rate of 30 to 60 miles per hour requires the combustion of fuel at a
high rate and the rapid evaporation of steam at pressures of 180 to
225 or more pounds per square inch. The consumption of coal by such a
locomotive may reach 100 pounds per minute, and two barrels of water
may be evaporated in the same time. This latter rate would require over
a gallon of water per second to be ejected through the stack as exhaust
steam. Some of the most marked improvements in locomotive practice have
been made practically within the past six or seven years in order to
meet these exacting requirements.

While the operations of locomotives will obviously depend largely upon
quality of fuel, speed, and other conditions, the investigations of
Prof. W. F. M. Goss and others appear to indicate that 12 to 14 pounds
of water per hour may be evaporated by a good locomotive boiler per
square foot of heating surface, and that 25 to 30 pounds of steam will
be required per indicated horse-power per hour.

=291. Principal Parts of a Modern Locomotive.=—The principal features
of a modern locomotive are the boiler with the smoke-stack placed on
the front end and the fire-box or furnace at the rear, the tubes, about
2 inches in diameter, through which the hot gases of combustion pass
from the furnace to the smoke-stack, the steam-cylinders with their
fittings of valves and valve movements, and the driving-wheels. These
features must all be designed more or less in reference to each other,
and whatever improvements have been made are indicated almost entirely
by the relative or absolute dimensions of those main features. The
boiler must be of sufficient size so that the water contained in it
may afford a free steam production, requiring in turn a corresponding
furnace capacity with the resulting heating surface. The latter is
that aggregate surface of the interior chambers of the boiler through
which the heat produced by combustion finds its way to the water
evaporated in steam; it is composed almost entirely of the surfaces
of the steel plates of the fire-box and of the numerous tubes running
through the boiler and parallel to its centre, exposed to the hot gases
of combustion and in contact with the water on the opposite sides of
those plates. Evidently an increase in size of the fire-box with the
correspondingly increased combustion will furnish a proportionally
larger amount of steam at the desired high pressure, but an increase
in the size of the fire-box is limited both in length and in width. It
is found that it is essentially impracticable for a fireman to serve a
fire-box more than about 10 feet in length. The maximum width of the
locomotive limits the width of the fire-box.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.]

=292. The Wootten Fire-box and Boiler.=—As the demand arose for an
enlarged furnace the width of the latter was restricted by the width
between the driving-wheel tires, less than 4 feet 6 inches. That
difficulty was overcome by what is known as the Wootten fire-box, which
was brought out by John E. Wootten of the Philadelphia and Reading
Railroad about 1877, and has since been developed and greatly improved
by others. The Wootten boiler with its sloping top and great width
extending out over the rear driving-wheels presented a rather curious
appearance and was a distinct departure in locomotive boiler design.
Fig. 21 shows an elevation and two sections of the original Wootten
type of boiler. It will be noticed that in front of the fire-box there
is a combustion-chamber of considerable length, 2½ to 3 feet long. This
boiler was first designed to burn the poorer grades of fuel, such as
coal-slack, in which the combustion-chamber to complete the combustion
of the fuel was thought essential. By Wootten’s device, i.e., extending
the boiler out over the driving-wheels, a much greater width of
fire-box was secured, but the height of the locomotive was considerably
increased. It cannot be definitely stated just how high the centre of
the locomotive boiler may be placed above the track without prejudice
to safety in running at high speeds, but it has not generally been
thought best to lift that centre more than about 9½ feet above the
tops of rails, and this matter has been held clearly in view in the
development of the wide fire-box type of locomotive boilers.

Like every other new form of machine, the Wootten boiler developed some
weak features, although there was no disappointment in its steaming
capacity. It will be noticed in the figure that the plates forming that
part of the boiler over the fire-box show abrupt changes in curvature
which induced ruptures of the stay-bolts and resulted in other
weaknesses. This boiler passed through various stages of development,
till at the present time Figs. 22 and 23 show its most advanced form,
which is satisfactory in almost or quite every detail. The sudden
changes in direction of the plates in the first Wootten example have
been displaced by more gradual and easy shapes. Indeed there are few
features other than those which characterize simple and easy boiler
construction. The enormous grate area is evident from the horizontal
dimensions of the fire-box, which are about 120 inches in length by
about 106 inches in breadth. The boiler has over 4000 square feet of
heating surface and carries about 200 pounds per square inch pressure
of steam. The combustion-chamber in front of the fire-box has been
reduced to a length of about 6 inches, just enough for the protection
of the expanded ends of the tubes. The barrel of the boiler in front of
the fire-box has a diameter of 80 inches and a length of about 15 feet.
The grate area is not far from 100 square feet. The improvements which
have culminated in the production of this boiler are due largely to Mr.
Samuel Higgins of the Lehigh Valley Road.

[Illustration: FIG. 22.]

[Illustration: FIG. 23.]

=293. Locomotives with Wootten Boilers.=—Fig. 24 exhibits a
consolidation freight locomotive of the Lehigh Valley Railroad, having
the boiler shown in Figs. 22 and 23. This machine is one of the most
efficient and powerful locomotives produced at the present time. The
locomotive shown in Fig. 25 has a record. It is one used on the fast
Reading express service between Philadelphia and Atlantic City during
the season of the latter resort. It has run one of the fastest schedule
trains in the world and has attracted attention in this country and
abroad. Its type is called the Atlantic and, as the view shows, it is
fitted with the Wootten improved type of boiler. It will be noticed
that the wide fire-box does not reach out over the rear drivers, but
over the small trailing-wheels immediately behind them. This is a
feature of wide locomotive fire-box practice at the present time to
which recourse is frequently had. There is no special significance
attached to the presence of the small trailing-wheels except as a
support for the rear end of the boiler, their diameters being small
enough to allow the extension of the fire-box over them without unduly
elevating the centre of the boiler.

[Illustration: FIG. 24.]

The cylinders of these and many other locomotives are known as the
Vauclain compound. In other words, it is a compound locomotive, there
being two cylinders, one immediately over the other, on each side. The
diameter of the upper cylinder is much less than that of the lower.
The steam is first admitted into the small upper cylinder and after
doing its work there passes into the lower or larger cylinder, where
it does its work a second time with greater expansion. By means of this
compound or double-cylinder use of the steam a higher rate of expansion
is secured and a more uniform pull is exerted upon the train, the first
generally contributing to a more economical employment of the steam,
which in turn means a less amount of fuel burned for a given amount of
tractive work performed.

[Illustration: FIG. 25.]

In the early part of November, 1901, an engine of this type hauling a
train composed of five cars and weighing 235 tons made a run of 55.5
miles between Philadelphia and Atlantic City at the rate of 71.6 miles
per hour, the fastest single mile being made at a rate of a little less
than 86 miles per hour.

The power being developed by these engines runs as high as 1400 H.P. at
high speeds and 2000 H.P. at the lower speeds of freight trains.

The chief economic advantage of these wide fire-box machines lies in
the fact that very indifferent grades of fuel may be consumed. Indeed
there are cases where fuel so poor as to be unmarketable has been used
most satisfactorily. With a narrow and small fire-box a desired high
rate of combustion sometimes demands a draft strong enough to raise
the fuel over the grate-bars. This difficulty is avoided in the large
fire-box, where sufficient combustion for rapid steaming is produced
with less intensity of blast.

=294. Recent Improvements in Locomotive Design.=—Concurrently with the
development of the Wootten type of boiler, other wide fire-box types
have been brought to a high state of excellence. In reality general
locomotive progress within the past few years has been summed up by Mr.
F. J. Cole as follows:

(_a_) The general introduction of the wide fire-box for burning
bituminous coal.

(_b_) The use of flues of largely increased length.

(_c_) The improvements in the design of piston-valves and their
introduction into general use.

(_d_) The recent progress made in the use of tandem compound cylinders.

[Illustration: FIG. 26.]

The piston-valve, to which reference is made, is a valve in the shape
of two pistons connected by an enlarged stem or pipe the entire length
of the double piston, the arrangement depending upon the length of
steam-cylinder or stroke; it may be 31 or 32 inches. This piston-valve
is placed between the steam-cylinder and the boiler, and is so moved
by eccentrics attached to the driving-wheel axles through the medium
of rocking levers and valve-stems as to admit steam to the cylinder at
the beginning of the stroke and allow it to escape after the stroke is
completed. Fig. 26 shows a section through the centre of one of these
piston-valves. It will be noticed that the live steam is admitted
around a central portion of the valve, and that the steam escapes
through the exhaust-passages at each end of the piston-valve. This type
of valve is advantageous with high steam pressures for the reason that
its “blast,” i.e., the steam pressure, does not press it against its
bearings as is the case with the old type of slide-valve, the wear of
which with modern high steam pressures would be excessive, although
under more recent slide-valve design this objection does not hold.

[Illustration: FIG. 27.]

=295. Compound Locomotives with Tandem Cylinders.=—The tandem
compound locomotive, as recently built, is a locomotive in which
the high-pressure cylinder is placed immediately in front of the
low-pressure cylinder and in line with it. In the Vauclain type it
is necessary to have a piston-rod for each of the two cylinders, one
above the other, each taking hold of the same cross-head. In the tandem
arrangement with the two cylinders each in line, but one piston-rod is
required. An example of a locomotive with this tandem arrangement of
compound cylinders will be shown farther on.

[Illustration: FIG. 28.]

Figs. 27 and 28 show two sections, one transverse and one longitudinal,
of a type of large fire-box boiler built by the American Locomotive
Works at Schenectady. The diameter of the barrel of the boiler in front
of the fire-box is about 5 feet 8 inches, while the clear greatest
width of the fire-box is 5 feet 4½ inches. The length of the latter is
8 feet 7 inches, making a total grate area in this particular instance
of over 45 square feet. There are 338 2-inch tubes, each 16 feet in
length. The total length over all of the boiler is 31 feet ½ inch. The
result of such a design is an arrangement by which a large grate area
is secured and a corresponding high rate of combustion without a too
violent draft. In designing locomotive boilers for bituminous coal
one square foot of grate area is sometimes provided for each 60 to 70
square feet of heating surface in the tubes.

[Illustration: FIG. 29.]

=296. Evaporative Efficiency of Different Rates of Combustion.=—In the
development of this particular class of locomotive boilers it is to be
remembered that as a rule the highest rates of combustion frequently
mean a decreased evaporation of water at boiler pressure per pound of
fuel. Modern locomotives may burn over 200 pounds of coal per square
foot of grate area per hour, and in doing so the evaporation may be
less than 5 pounds of water per pound of fuel. On the other hand, when
the coal burned does not exceed 50 pounds per square foot of grate area
per hour, as much as 8 pounds of water may be evaporated for each pound
of coal. It is judicious, therefore, to have large grate area, other
things being equal, in order that the highest attainable efficiency in
evaporation may be reached.

=296a. Tractive Force of a Locomotive.=—The tractive force of a
locomotive arises from the fact that one solid body cannot be moved
over another, however smooth the surface of contact may be, without
developing the force called resistance of friction. This resistance is
measured by what is called the coefficient of friction, determined only
by experiment. The resistance of friction and this coefficient will
depend both upon the degree of smoothness of the surface of contact
and on its character. If surfaces are lubricated, as in the moving
parts of machinery, the force of friction is very much decreased, but
in the absence of that lubricant it will have a much higher value.
The coefficient of friction is a ratio which denotes the part of the
weight of the body moved which must be applied as a force to that body
in order to put it in motion against the resistance of friction. In
the case of lubricated surfaces this ratio may be as small as a few
hundredths. In the case of locomotive driving-wheels and the track on
which they rest this value is usually taken at .2 to .25.

There are times when it is desirable to increase the resistance of
friction between locomotive drivers and the rails. For this purpose a
simple device, called the sand-box, is frequently placed on the top of
a locomotive boiler with pipes running down from it so as to discharge
the sand on the rails immediately in front of the drivers. The sand is
crushed under the wheels and offers an increased resistance to their
slipping.

The tractive force of a locomotive may also be computed from the
pressure of steam against the pistons in the steam-cylinders. If the
indicated horse-power in the cylinder be represented by H.P., and
if all frictional or other resistance between the cylinder and the
draw-bar be neglected, the following equality will hold:

    Draw-bar pull × speed of train in miles }
         per hour × 5280                    } = H.P. × 33,000 × 60.

If _S_ = speed in miles per hour, and if _T_ = draw-bar pull, then the
preceding equality gives

          375 × H.P.
    _T_ = ----------.
            _S_

This value of the “pull” must be diminished by the friction of the
locomotive as a machine, by the rolling resistance of the trucks and
tender, and by the atmospheric resistance of the locomotive as the head
of the train. Prof. Goss proposes the following approximate values for
these resistances in a paper read before the New England Railroad Club
in December, 1901.

A number of tests have shown that a steam pressure of 3.8 pounds per
square inch on the piston is required to overcome the machine friction
of the locomotive. Hence if _d_ is the diameter of the piston in
inches, _L_ the piston-stroke in feet, and _D_ the diameter of driver
in feet, while _f_ is that part of the draw-bar pull required to
overcome machine friction, the following equation will hold:

                   π_d_²
    _f_.π_D_ = 3.8 -----× 2_L_ × 2.
                    4

                     _d²L_
        ∴ _f_ = 3.8 ------.
                       _D_

Again, if _W_ be the rolling load in tons on tender and trucks
(excluding that on drivers), and if _r_ be that part of the draw-bar
pull required to overcome the rolling resistance due to _W_, then
experience indicates that approximately, in pounds,

          (    _S_ )
    _r_ = (2 + --- )_W_.
          (     6  )

As before, _S_ is the speed in miles per hour.

Finally, if _h_ be that part of the draw-bar pull in pounds required to
overcome the head resistance (atmospheric) of the locomotive, there may
be written approximately

    _h_ = .11_S_².

The actual draw-bar pull in pounds available for moving the train will
then be

                          375 H.P.      _d_²_L      (     S_ )
    _t = T - f - r - h_ = -------- - 3.8------ - _W_(2 + ----) - .11_S_².
                           _S             D_        (     6  )

The maximum value of _t_ should be taken as one fourth the greatest
weight on drivers.

If _H_ is the total heating surface in square feet, and if 12 pounds of
water be evaporated per square foot per hour, while 28 pounds of steam
are required per horse-power per hour, then

           12_H_      375H.P.   161_H_
    H.P. = ----- and -------- = ------.
            28         _S          S_

Hence

          161_H      d²L_       (    _S_ )
    _t_ = ----- - 3.8----- - _W_(2 + ----) - .11_S²_.
           _S         D_        (     6  )

The actual draw-bar pull in pounds may then be computed by this formula.

Some recent tests of actual trains (both heavy and light) on the N.
Y. C. & H. R. R. R. between Mott Haven Junction and the Grand Central
Station, New York City, a distance of 5.3 miles, by M. Bion J. Arnold,
by means of a dynamometer-car, gave the actual average draw-bar pull
per ton of 2000 pounds as ranging from 12 to 25 pounds going in one
direction and 12.1 to 24 pounds in the opposite direction. There were
eight tests in each direction, and the greatest speed did not exceed 30
miles per hour.

As the diameter of the driver appears in the preceding formulæ, it may
be well to state that an approximate rule for that diameter is to make
it as many inches as the desired maximum speed in miles per hour, i.e.,
70 inches for 70 miles, or 80 inches for 80 miles, per hour.

=297. Central Atlantic Type of Locomotive.=—Fig. 29 represents what is
termed the Central Atlantic type (single cylinder) of engine, which
is used for hauling most of the fast passenger trains on the New York
Central and Hudson River Railroad. The characteristics of boiler and
fire-box are such as are shown in Figs. 27 and 28.

The cylinders are 21 inches internal diameter, and the stroke is 26
inches. The total grate area is 50 square feet, and the total heating
surface 3500 square feet. The total weight of the locomotive is 176,000
pounds, with 95,000 on the drivers. It will be observed that the total
weight of locomotive per square foot of heating surface is scarcely
more than 650 pounds, which is a low value. The boiler pressure
carried may be 200 pounds per square inch or more. The tractive force
of this locomotive may be taken at 24,700 pounds. There is supplied
to these engines, among others, what is called a traction-increasing
device. This traction-increaser is nothing more nor less than a
compressed-air cylinder secured to the boiler, so that as its piston
is pressed outward, i.e., downward, it carries with it a lever, the
fulcrum of which is on the equalizing-lever of the locomotive frame,
the other or short end of the lever being attached to the main bar of
the frame itself. This operation redistributes the boiler-load on the
frame, so as to increase that portion which is carried by the drivers.
This has been found to be a convenient device in starting trains and
on up grades. In the present instance the traction-increaser may be
operated so as to increase the load on the drivers by about 12,000
pounds. It is not supposed to be used except when needed under the
circumstances indicated.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.]

A number of indicator-cards taken from the steam-cylinders of these
engines hauling the Empire State Express and other fast passenger
trains on the Hudson River Division of the N. Y. C. & H. R. R. R.,
show that with a train weighing about 208 tons while running at a
speed of 75 miles per hour 1323 H.P. was developed. Fig. 30 shows
these indicator diagrams. With a train weighing 685 tons 1452 H.P. was
indicated at a speed of 63 miles per hour.

=298. Consolidation Engine, N. Y. C. & H. R. R. R.=—One of the heaviest
wide fire-box compound consolidation engines recently built for the New
York Central freight service is shown in Fig. 31. It will be noticed
that there is but one cylinder on each side of the locomotive, and
that they are of different diameters. One of these cylinders, 23 inches
inside diameter, is a high-pressure cylinder, and the other, 35 inches
inside diameter, is a low-pressure cylinder, the stroke in each case
being 34 inches. The total grate area is 50.3 square feet, the fire-box
being 8 feet long by 6 feet 3 inches wide. The total heating surface
is 3480 square feet. The diameter of the barrel of the boiler at the
front end is 72 inches, and the diameter of the drivers 63 inches. The
pressure of steam in the boiler is 210 pounds per square inch. The
total weight of the locomotive is 194,000 pounds, of which 167,000
rests upon the drivers. These engines afford a maximum tractive force
of 37,900 pounds. This engine is typical of those used for the New York
Central freight service. They have hauled trains weighing nearly 2200
tons over the New York Central road.

[Illustration: FIG. 31.]

=299. P., B. & L. E. Consolidation.=—The consolidation locomotive shown
in Fig. 32 is a remarkable one in that it was for a time the heaviest
constructed, but its weight has since been exceeded by at least two of
the Decapod type built for the Sante Fé company. It was built at the
Pittsburg works of the American Locomotive Company for the Pittsburg,
Bessemer and Lake Erie Railroad to haul heavy trains of iron ore. The
total weight is 250,300 pounds, of which the remarkable proportion of
225,200 is carried by the drivers. The tender carries 7500 gallons
of water, and the weight of it when loaded is 141,100 pounds, so that
the total weight of engine and tender is 391,400 pounds. The average
weight of engine and tender therefore approaches 7000 pounds per
lineal foot. This is not a compound locomotive, but each cylinder has
24 inches inside diameter and 32 inches stroke, the diameter of the
driving-wheels being 54 inches. The boiler carries a pressure of 220
pounds, and the tractive force of the locomotive is 63,000 pounds.

[Illustration: FIG. 32.]

A noticeable feature of this design, and one which does not agree with
modern views prompting the design of wide fire-boxes, is its great
length of 11 feet and its small width of 3 feet 4¼ inches. There are
in the boiler 406 2¼-inch tubes, each 15 feet long, the total heating
surface being 3805 square feet.

=300. L. S. & M. S. Fast Passenger Engine.=—The locomotive shown in
Fig. 33 is also a remarkable one in some of its features, chief among
which is the 19 feet length of tubes. It was built at the Brooks works
of the American Locomotive Company for the Lake Shore and Michigan
Southern Railroad. The total weight of engine is 174,500 pounds, of
which 130,000 pounds rests upon the drivers. The rear truck carries
23,000 pounds and the front truck 21,500 pounds. This is not a compound
engine. The cylinders have each an inside diameter of 20½ inches, and
28 inches stroke. As this locomotive is for fast passenger traffic, the
driving-wheels are each 80 inches in diameter, and the driving-wheel
base is 14 feet. The fire-box is 85 × 84 inches, giving a grate area
of 48½ square feet and a total heating surface of 3343 square feet.
There are 285 2¼-inch flues, each 19 feet long. The tender carries 6000
gallons of water. Cast and compressed steel were used in this design
to the greatest possible extent, and the result is shown in that the
weight divided by the square feet of heating surface is 52.18 pounds.

[Illustration: FIG. 33.]

=301. Northern Pacific Tandem Compound Locomotive.=—The diagram shown
in Fig. 34 exhibits the outlines and main features of a tandem compound
locomotive to which allusion has already been made. It was built at
Schenectady, New York, in 1900, for the Northern Pacific Railroad, and
was intended for heavy service on the mining portions of that line.

The diameters of the high- and low-pressure cylinders are respectively
each 15 and 28 inches, with a stroke of 34 inches, while the boiler
pressure is 225 pounds per square inch. The total weight of the machine
is 195,000 pounds and the weight on the drivers 170,000 pounds, the
diameter of the drivers being 55 inches. As the figure shows, it
belongs to the consolidation type. The fire-box is 10 feet long by 3.5
feet wide, giving a grate area of 35 square feet, with which is found
a total heating surface of 3080 square feet. There are 388 2-inch
tubes, each 14 feet 2 inches long. These engines are among the earliest
compound-tandem type and have been very successful. Other locomotives
of practically the same general type have been fitted with a wide
fire-box, 8 feet 4 inches long by 6 feet 3 inches wide, with the grate
area thus increased to 52.3 square feet.

[Illustration: FIG. 34.]

=302. Union Pacific Vauclain Compound Locomotive.=—The next example
of modern locomotive is the Vauclain compound type used on the Union
Pacific Railroad. It is a ten-wheel passenger engine and one of a
large number in use. The weight on the drivers is 142,000 pounds,
and the total weight of the locomotive is about 185,000 pounds. The
high-pressure cylinder has an inside diameter of 15½ inches, while the
low-pressure cylinder has a diameter of 26 inches. The stroke is 28
inches and the diameter of the driving-wheels 79 inches. On the Union
Pacific Railroad the diameter of the driving-wheel varies somewhat with
the grades of the divisions on which the engines run.

[Illustration: FIG. 35.]

In some portions of the country, as in Southern California, oil has
come into quite extended use for locomotive fuel.

=303. Southern Pacific Mogul with Vanderbilt Boiler.=—The locomotive
shown in Fig. 36 belongs to the Mogul type, having three pairs
of driving-wheels and one pair of pilots. It is fitted with the
Vanderbilt boiler adapted to the use of oil fuel. The locomotives of
which this is an example were built for the Southern Pacific Company,
and they have performed their work in a highly satisfactory manner.
They are not particularly large locomotives as those matters go at the
present day, as they carry about 135,000 pounds on the drivers and
22,000 pounds on the truck, giving a total weight of 157,000 pounds.
The characteristic feature of the machine is its adaptation to the
burning of oil, which requires practically no labor in firing, although
the services of a fireman must still be retained.

[Illustration: FIG. 36.]

=304. The “Soo” Decapod Locomotive.=—It has been seen that the results
of Trevethick’s early efforts was a crude and simple machine, with what
might be termed, in courtesy to that early attempt, a single pair of
drivers. Subsequently, as locomotive evolution took place, two pairs
of drivers coupled with the horizontal connecting-rod were employed.
Then the Mogul with the three pairs of coupled drivers was used, and
at or about the same time the consolidation type with four pairs of
coupled drivers was found adapted in a high degree to the hauling of
great freight trains. The last evolution in driving-wheel arrangement
is exhibited in Fig. 37. It belongs to what is called the Decapod type.
As a matter of fact, five pairs of coupled driving-wheels have been
occasionally used for a considerable number of years, but this engine
is the Decapod brought up to the highest point of modern excellence.
As shown, it uses steam by the Vauclain compound system, the small or
high-pressure cylinder being underneath the low-pressure cylinder. They
have been built by the Baldwin Locomotive Works for the Minneapolis,
St. Paul and Sault Ste. Marie Railroad Company, on what is called the
“Soo Line.” It has given so much satisfaction that more of this type
but of greater weight are being built for the same company. This engine
was limited to a total weight of 215,000 pounds, with 190,000 pounds on
the drivers.

[Illustration: FIG. 37.]

[Illustration: FIG. 38.]

[Illustration: FIG. 39.]

[Illustration: FIG. 40.]

=305. The A., T. & S. F. Decapod, the Heaviest Locomotive yet
Built.=—The heaviest locomotive yet constructed, consequently occupying
the primacy in weight, is that shown in Fig. 38. It is a Decapod
operated with others of its type by the A., T. & S. F. Company near
Bakersfield, California. It is a tandem compound coal-burner, as shown
by the illustration, the high-pressure cylinder being in front of the
low-pressure. The dimensions of cylinders are 19 and 32 × 32 inches
stroke, and the driving-wheels are 57 inches in diameter. The total
height from the top of stack down to the rail is 15 feet 6 inches,
while the height of the centre of the boiler above the rails is 9 feet
10 inches. Figs. 39 and 40 show some of the main boiler and fire-box
dimensions. There are 463 2¼-inch tubes, each 19 feet long. The total
heating surface is 5390 square feet, about one eighth of an acre, the
length of the fire-box being 108 inches and the width 78 inches. The
heating surface in the tubes is 5156 square feet, and in the fire-box
210.3 square feet; the grate surface having an area of 58.5 square
feet. The boiler is designed to carry a working pressure of 225 pounds
per square inch, the boiler-plates being ¹⁵/₁₆ inch, ⁹/₁₆ inch, and ⅞
inch thick, according to location. As shown by the illustrations, the
boiler is what is termed an extended wagon-top with wide fire-box. The
total weight of the locomotive itself is 267,800 pounds, while the
weight on the driving-wheels is 237,800 pounds, making 47,560 pounds
on each axle. The tractive force of this locomotive is estimated to be
over 62,000 pounds.

=306. Comparison of Some of the Heaviest Locomotives in Use.=—The
following table gives a comparison of the heaviest locomotives thus
far built, as taken from the _Railroad Gazette_ for January 31, 1902,
revised to September 1, 1902.

COMPARISON OF HEAVIEST LOCOMOTIVES.

    ---------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------
                         |   Atchison,    | Pittsburg,  |    Union
                         |    Topeka      | Bessemer &  |  Railroad.
                         |  & Santa Fé.   | Lake Erie.  |
    ---------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------
    Name of builder      |     Baldwin    |  Pittsburg  |  Pittsburg
    Size of cylinders    |19 & 32 × 32 in.|24 × 32 in.  |23 × 32 in.
    Total weight         | 267,800 lbs.   |250,300 lbs. |230,000 lbs.
    Weight on drivers    | 237,800 lbs.   |225,200 lbs. |208,000 lbs.
    Driving-wheels, diam.|    57 in.      |   54 in.    |   54 in.
    Heating surface      | 5,390 sq. ft.  |3,805 sq. ft.|3,322 sq. ft.
    Grate area           | 58.5 sq. ft.   |36.8 sq. ft. |33.5 sq. ft.
    ---------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------
                         |    Illinois    |     Lehigh
                         |    Central.    |     Valley.
    ---------------------+----------------+----------------
    Name of builder      |      Brooks    |    Baldwin
    Size of cylinders    | 23 × 30 in.    | 18 & 30 × 30 in.
    Total weight         | 232,200 lbs.   | 225,082 lbs.
    Weight on drivers    | 193,200 lbs.   | 202,232 lbs.
    Driving-wheels, diam.|    57 in.      |   55 in.
    Heating surface      | 3,500 sq. ft.  | 4,104 sq. ft.
    Grate area           | 37.5 sq. ft.   | 90 sq. ft.
    ---------------------+----------------+----------------

These instances of modern locomotive construction are impressive,
especially when considered in contrast with the type of engine in use
not more than fifty years ago. They indicate an almost incredible
advance in railroad transportation, and they account for the fact that
a bushel of wheat can be brought overland at the present time from
Chicago to New York City, a distance of 900 miles, for about one third
of the lowest charge for delivering a valise from the Grand Central
Station in the city of New York to a residence within a mile of it.




PART V.

_THE NICARAGUA ROUTE FOR A SHIP-CANAL._


=307. Feasibility of Nicaragua Route.=—The feasibility of a ship-canal
between the two oceans across Nicaragua has been recognized almost
since the discovery of Lake Nicaragua in 1522 by Gil Gonzales de Avila,
who was sent out from Spain to succeed Balboa, after the execution of
the latter by Pedro Arias de Avila at Acla on the Isthmus of Panama.

=308. Discovery of Lake Nicaragua.=—Gil Gonzales set sail from the
Bay of Panama in January of that year northward along the Pacific
coast as far as the Gulf of Fonseca. He landed there and proceeded to
explore the country with one hundred men, and found what he considered
a great inland sea, as we now know, about 14 miles from the Pacific
Ocean at the place of least separation. The country was inhabited,
and he found a native chief called Nicarao, who was settled with his
people at or near the site of the present city of Rivas. As he found
it a goodly country, fertile and abounding in precious metals, he
immediately proceeded to take possession of it for his sovereign, but
the Spanish explorer was sufficiently gracious to the friendly chief
to name Lake Nicaragua after him. From that time the part of Nicaragua
in the vicinity of the lake received much attention, and the Spaniards
made conquest of it without delay. Among those who were the earliest
visitors was a Captain Diego Machuca, who, with two hundred men under
his command, explored Lake Nicaragua in 1529 and constructed boats
on it, a brigantine among them. He seems to have been the first one
who entered and sailed down the Desaguadero River, now called the San
Juan, and one of the rapids in the upper portion of the river now
bears his name. He pursued his course into the Caribbean Sea and sailed
eastward to the Isthmus of Panama.

[Illustration: Map of American Isthmus, showing Proposed Canal Routes.]

=309. Early Maritime Commerce with Lake Nicaragua.=—Subsequently
sea-going vessels passed through the San Juan River in both directions
and maintained a maritime trade of some magnitude between the shores
of Lake Nicaragua and Spain. Obviously these vessels must have been
rather small for ocean-going craft, unless there was more water in the
San Juan River in those early days than at present. There are some
obscure traditions of earthquakes having disturbed the bed of the river
and made its passage more difficult by reducing the depth of water in
some of the rapids; but these reports are little more than traditionary
and lack authoritative confirmation. It is certain, however, that the
marine traffic, to which reference has been made, was maintained for
a long period of years, its greatest activity existing at about the
beginning of the seventeenth century. It was in connection with this
traffic probably that the city of Granada at the northwestern extremity
of the lake was established, perhaps before 1530.

=310. Early Examination of Nicaragua Route.=—Although the apparently
easy connection between the Caribbean Sea and Lake Nicaragua, together
with the proximity of the latter to the Pacific coast, at once
indicated the possibility of a feasible water communication between
the two oceans, probably no systematic investigation to determine a
definite canal line was made until that undertaken by Manuel Galisteo
in 1779 under the instruction of Charles III., who was then on the
throne of Spain. Galisteo made a report in 1781 that Lake Nicaragua
was 134 feet higher than the Pacific Ocean, and that high mountains
intervened between the lake and the ocean, making it impracticable
to establish a water communication between the two. In spite of the
discouragement of this report a company was subsequently formed under
the patronage of the crown to construct a canal from Lake Nicaragua
along the Sanoa River to the Gulf of Nicoya, but nothing ever came of
the project.

=311. English Invasion of Nicaragua.=—The country was invaded in 1780
by an English expedition sent out from Jamaica under Captain Horatio
Nelson, who subsequently became the great admiral. He proceeded up
the San Juan River, and after some fighting captured by assault Fort
San Juan at Castillo Viejo. Nelson and his force, however, were ill
qualified to take care of themselves in that tropical country where
drenching rains were constantly falling, and he was therefore obliged
to abandon his plan of taking possession of Lake Nicaragua and returned
instead to Jamaica. The tropical fevers induced by exposure reduced
the crew of his own ship, two hundred in number, to only ten after his
return to Jamaica, and he himself nearly lost his life by sickness.

=312. Atlantic and Pacific Ship-canal Company.=—Subsequently to this
period the Nicaragua route attracted more or less attention until Mr.
E. G. Squier, the first consul for the United States in Nicaragua,
negotiated a treaty between the two countries for facilitating the
traffic from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean by means of a ship-canal
or railroad in the interest of the Atlantic and Pacific Ship-canal
Company, composed of Cornelius Vanderbilt, Joseph L. White, Nathaniel
Wolfe, and others. It was at this time that the Nicaragua route became
prominent as a line of travel between New York and San Francisco.
Ships carried passengers and freight from New York to Greytown, then
trans-shipped them to river steamboats running up the San Juan River
and across the southerly end of the lake to a small town called La
Virgin, whence a good road for 14 miles overland led to the Pacific
port of San Juan del Sur. Pacific coast steamships completed the trip
between the latter port and San Francisco.

=313. Survey and Project of Col. O. W. Childs.=—This traffic stimulated
the old idea of a ship-canal across the Central American isthmus on the
Nicaragua route to such an extent that Col. O. W. Childs, an eminent
civil engineer, was instructed by the American Atlantic and Pacific
Ship-canal Company to make surveys and examinations for the project
of a ship-canal on that route. The results of his surveys, made in
1850-52, have become classic in interoceanic canal literature. He
concluded that the most feasible route lay up the San Juan River from
Greytown to Lake Nicaragua, across that lake, and down the general
course of the Rio Grande on the west side of Nicaragua to Brito on the
Pacific coast. This is practically identical with the route adopted by
the Isthmian Canal Commission now (1902) being discussed in Congress.

=314. The Project of the Maritime Canal Company.=—The project planned
by Col. Childs, like those which preceded it, had no substantial issue,
but the general subject of an isthmian canal across Nicaragua was, from
that time, under almost constant agitation and consideration more or
less active until the Maritime Canal Company of Nicaragua was organized
in February, 1889, under concessions secured from the governments
of Nicaragua and Costa Rica by Mr. A. G. Menocal. This company made
a careful examination of all preceding proposed routes, and finally
settled upon a plan radically different in some respects from any
before considered. The Caribbean end of the canal was located on the
Greytown Lagoon west of Greytown. From that point the line followed
up the valley of the Deseado River and cut across the hills into the
valley of the San Juan above its junction with the San Carlos. A dam
was to be constructed across the San Juan River at Ochoa, below the
mouth of the San Carlos, so as to bring the surface of Lake Nicaragua
down to that point. From its junction with the San Juan River the canal
line followed that river to the lake, across the latter to Las Lajas,
and thence down the Rio Grande to the Pacific coast at Brito. It was
contemplated under this plan to carry the lake level to a point called
La Flor, 13.5 miles west of the lake, and drop down to the Pacific
from that point by locks suitably located. After partially excavating
the canal prism for about three quarters of a mile from the Greytown
Lagoon, constructing a line of railroad up the Deseado valley, as well
as a telegraph line, and doing certain other work preparatory to the
actual work of construction, the Maritime Canal Company became involved
in financial difficulties and suspended operations without again
resuming them.

[Illustration: Breakwater of the Maritime Canal Company. The closed
former entrance to Greytown harbor is shown on the left.]

=315. The Work of the Ludlow and Nicaragua Canal Commissions.=—In
1895 and again in 1897 two commissions were appointed by the
President of the United States to consider the plans and estimates
of the Maritime Canal Company in the one case, and the problem of a
ship-canal on the Nicaragua route in the latter. Neither of these
commissions, however, had the funds at its disposal requisite for a
full and complete consideration of the problem. In 1899, therefore,
the Isthmian Canal Commission was created by Act of Congress, and
appointed by the President of the United States, to determine the most
feasible and practical route across the Central American isthmus for a
canal, together with the cost of constructing it and placing it under
the control, management, and ownership of the United States. This
commission consisted of nine members, and included civil and military
engineers, an officer of the navy, an ex-senator of the United States,
and a statistician. It was the province and duty of this commission to
make examinations of the entire isthmus from the Atrato River in the
northwestern corner of South America to the western limits of Nicaragua
for the purpose of determining the most feasible and practical route
for a ship-canal between those territorial limits. This brings the
general consideration of the isthmian canal question to the Nicaragua
route in particular, to which alone attention will be directed in this
part.

=316. The Route of the Isthmian Canal Commission.=—The Isthmian Canal
Commission adopted a route practically following the San Juan River
from near Greytown to the lake, across the latter to Las Lajas on
its westerly shore, and thence up the course of the Las Lajas River,
across the continental divide into the Rio Grande valley, and down the
latter to Brito at the mouth of the Rio Grande on the Pacific coast.
As has already been stated, this is practically the line adopted by
Col. Childs almost exactly fifty years ago. It is also essentially the
route adopted by the Nicaragua Canal Commission appointed in 1897,
and which completed its operations immediately prior to the creation
of the Isthmian Canal Commission. The amount of work performed in the
field under the direction of the commission can be realized from the
statement that twenty working parties were organized in Nicaragua with
one hundred and fifty-nine civil engineers and other assistants, and
four hundred and fifty-five laborers.

=317. Standard Dimensions of Canal Prism.=—By the Act of Congress
creating it, the latter commission was instructed to consider plans
and estimates for a canal of sufficient capacity to accommodate the
largest ships afloat. In order to meet the requirements of those
statutory instructions the commission decided to adopt 35 feet as the
minimum depth of water in the canal throughout its entire length from
the deep water of one ocean to that of the other, wherever the most
feasible and practical route might be located, the investigations of
the commission having shown that the final location to be selected must
narrow down to a choice between the Panama and the Nicaragua routes.
It was further decided by the commission that the standard width of
excavation at the bottom of the canal should be 150 feet, with 500 feet
for the ocean entrances to harbors, and 800 feet in those harbors.
Greater widths than that of the bottom of standard excavations were
also adopted for river and lake portions. The slopes of the sides of
the excavation were determined to be 1 vertical on 1½ horizontal for
firm earth, but as flat as 1 vertical on 3 or even 6 horizontal for
soft mud or silt in marshy locations. In rock cutting below water the
sides of the excavation would be vertical, but as steep as 4 vertical
on 1 horizontal above water.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Standard Sections adopted by the Isthmian Canal
Commission.]

The longest ship afloat at the present time (1902) is the Oceanic of
the White Star Line, and its length is about 704 feet. The widest
ships, i.e., the ships having the greatest beam, are naval vessels,
and at the present time none has a greater beam than about 77 feet. In
order to afford accommodation for further development in both length
and beam of ships without leading to extravagant dimensions, the
commission decided to provide locks having a usable length of 740 feet
with a clear width of 84 feet. These general dimensions meet fully the
requirements of the law, and were adopted for plans and estimates on
both the Panama and Nicaragua routes.

=318. The San Juan Delta.=—The entire Central American isthmus
is volcanic in character, and this is particularly true of the
country along the Nicaragua route with the exception of the lowlands
immediately back of the ocean shore line in the vicinity of Greytown.
From the latter point to Fort San Carlos, where the San Juan River
leaves the lake, is approximately 100 miles. With the exception of
the 15 miles nearest to the seacoast the San Juan River runs mostly
through a rugged country with high hills densely wooded on either
side. The soil is mostly heavy clay, although the bottom of the valley
immediately adjacent to the river is largely of sandy silt with some
mixture of clay. Between the hills back of Greytown and the seacoast
the country is almost a continuous morass covered with coarse grasses
and other dense tropical vegetation, but with a number of small
isolated hills projecting up like islands in the surrounding marsh,
and interspersed with numerous lagoons. All this flat country has the
appearance of forming a delta through which a number of mouths of the
San Juan River find their way. One of these, called the Lower San Juan,
empties into the Greytown Lagoon, but the main mouth of the San Juan,
called the Colorado, branches from the main river at the point where
the Lower San Juan begins, about 13 or 14 miles from the ocean. The
Colorado itself is composed of two branches, and at the place where it
empties into the sea there are a number of long narrow lagoons parallel
to the seashore, appearing to indicate comparatively recent shore
formation. Again, a small river called the Rio San Juanillo leaves the
main river 3 or 4 miles above the junction of the lower San Juan and
the Colorado, and pursues a meandering course through the low marshy
grounds back of Greytown, and finally again joins the Lower San Juan
near the town. This marshy lowland is underlaid by and formed largely
of dark-colored sand brought down mostly from the volcanic mountains of
Costa Rica by two rivers, the San Carlos and the Serapiqui, the former
joining the San Juan about 44 miles and the latter about 23 miles from
the sea.

[Illustration: Greytown Lagoon (formerly Greytown Harbor), showing
Greytown in the Distance.]

=319. The San Carlos and Serapiqui Rivers.=—Both those Costa Rican
rivers are subject to sudden and violent floods, and they bring down
large quantities of this volcanic sand, the specific gravity of which
is rather low. The San Carlos bears the greater burden of this kind.
In fact its bed, even when not in a state of flood, is at many points
at least composed of moving sands. Both rivers are clear-water streams
except in high water stages. Below the junction of the San Carlos the
San Juan is necessarily in times of floods a large bearer of silt and
sand, but above that point it carries little or no sediment. There are
no streams of magnitude which join the San Juan between the lake and
the San Carlos.

=320. The Rapids and Castillo Viejo.=—About 54 miles from the ocean
are the Machuca Rapids, and from that point to a distance of about 75
miles from the ocean other rapids are found, the principal of which are
the Castillo and the Toro. The Castillo Rapids are at the point called
Castillo Viejo, where there is located an old Spanish fort on the top
of the high hill around the base of which the river flows. The town of
Castillo Viejo has a small population of perhaps 500 to 600 people.
It is a place with historical associations, to which reference has
already been made. It was here that Captain (afterwards Admiral) Nelson
captured the Spanish fort in 1780. It is a place of some importance
in connection with the river traffic in consequence of necessary
transhipment of freight and passengers to overcome the rapids.

=321. The Upper San Juan.=—The upper reaches of the San Juan within
about 20 miles of the lake are bordered with considerable marshy
ground. In the vicinity of its exit from the lake there is a wide strip
of soft marshy country around the entire southeastern shore.

=322. The Rainfall from Greytown to the Lake.=—The entire country
between Greytown and the lake is intensely tropical, and the vegetation
is characteristically dense. It is particularly so at Greytown, where
the total annual rainfall sometimes reaches as much as 300 inches.
It rains many times in a day, and nearly every day in the year. The
strong easterly and northeasterly trade winds, heavy-laden with the
evaporation from the tropical sea, meet the high ground in the vicinity
of Greytown and precipitate their watery contents in frequent and heavy
showers. The general course of the San Juan valley is a little north
of west or south of east, and the trade winds appear to follow the
course of the valley to the lake. The rainfall steadily decreases as
the seashore is left behind, so that at Fort San Carlos, the point of
exit of the river from the lake, the annual precipitation may vary from
75 to 100 inches. There is no so-called dry season between the lake and
the Caribbean Sea, although at Fort San Carlos the rainfall is so small
between the middle of December and the middle of May that that period
may perhaps be considered, relatively speaking, a dry season. It is
evident, therefore, that all the conditions are favorable to luxuriant
tropical growths over this entire eastern portion of the canal route,
and the coarse grasses, palms, and other tropical vegetation found in
it are indescribably dense. The same general observation is applicable
to the forest and undergrowth throughout the entire course of the river
from Greytown to Fort San Carlos. All of the high ground is heavily
timbered, with undergrowth so dense that no survey line can be run
until it is first completely cut out. That observation holds with added
force throughout the swampy country adjacent to the seashore. All the
heavy forest growth carries dense vines and innumerable orchids, which
so cover the trunks and branches of trees as in many places completely
to obscure them.

[Illustration: The Maritime Canal Company’s Canal Cut leading out of
Greytown Lagoon.]

=323. Lake-surface Elevation and Slope of the River.=—The lake surface
has an area of about 3000 square miles and varies in elevation with the
amount of rainfall in its basin from about 97 or 98 to perhaps 110 feet
above the ocean. The average elevation can probably be taken at about
104 feet above the sea. The length of the lake is about 103 miles,
with a greatest width of 45 miles. The area of its watershed is about
12,000 square miles. Inasmuch as the length of the San Juan River from
the ocean to the lake is but a little more than 100 miles, its average
fall is seen to be about 1 foot per mile. The greatest slope of the
river surface is at Castillo Rapids, where it falls about 6 feet in ⅜
of a mile. At the Machuca Rapids it falls about 4 feet in 1 mile. From
the foot of Machuca Rapids to the mouth of the San Carlos, a distance
of a little over 15 miles, the surface of the river falls about 1 foot
only. This pool, with practically no sensible current, is called Agua
Muerte, or Dead Water. The relatively great depth of this pool shows
conclusively that the upper San Juan, i.e., above the mouth of the San
Carlos, carries no silt, otherwise the pool would be filled; in other
words, that part of the San Juan River is not a sediment-bearer. The
slope of the river surface in the Toro Rapids, about 27 miles from the
lake, gives a fall of 7³/₁₀ feet in 1⁷/₁₀ miles.

=324. Discharges of the San Juan, San Carlos, and Serapiqui.=—In
times of heavy floods the San Carlos River may discharge as much as
100,000 cubic feet per second into the San Juan, but such floods have
a duration of a comparatively few hours only. Its low water-discharge
may fall below 3000 cubic feet per second. The maximum outflow of the
lake during a rainy season or a season of heavy rainfall probably never
exceeds about 70,000 cubic feet per second, but that rate of discharge
may continue for a number of weeks. The low water-discharge of the San
Juan above the mouth of the San Carlos may fall below 10,000 feet per
second, or 13,000 feet per second below the mouth of the San Carlos but
above that of the Serapiqui.

=325. Navigation on the San Juan.=—From what has been said of the
San Juan River it is evident that in times of low water no boats
drawing more than about 5 or 6 feet can navigate it, and most of the
river boats draw less than that amount. In times of low water no
boat can navigate the Lower San Juan drawing more than about 2½ to 3
feet of water. Nor, again, can the ordinary river boats pass up the
rapids at Castillo except at high water. It is necessary, therefore,
that the larger boats used on the river confine their trips on the
one hand between the mouth of the Colorado and Castillo, and on the
other between Castillo above the rapids to Fort San Carlos. It is the
custom, therefore, to transfer passengers and freight from boats below
the rapids at Castillo by a short tramway to other boats in waiting
above the rapids at that point. Boats pass up Machuca and Toro rapids
at practically all seasons, but sometimes with difficulty.

In order to meet the exigencies of low water in the Lower San Juan
a railroad called the Silico Lake Railroad, with 3 feet gauge, has
been constructed from a point opposite the mouth of the Colorado,
called Boca Colorado, to Lake Silico in the marshes back of Greytown,
a distance of about 6 miles. Light-draft boats connect Lake Silico
with Greytown for the transfer of passengers and freight. The type of
light-draft steamboat used on the San Juan River is the stern-wheel
pattern, so much used on the western rivers of this country, the
lower deck carrying the engines and boilers as well as freight, while
the upper deck, fitted with crude staterooms, furnishes a kind of
accommodation for passengers.

=326. The Canal Line through the Lake and Across the West Side.=—The
little town of Fort San Carlos on a point raised somewhat above the
lake where the San Juan River leaves the latter is the second place
on the entire river from Greytown where any population may said to be
found, and probably not more than 400 or 500 people even there. Its
position is on the north side of the river, at the extreme southeastern
end of the lake, commanding a fine view of the water and the country
bordering it in that vicinity. To the westward lie the Solentiname
Islands, a group a short distance to the north of which the sailing
line for the canal in the lake is located. After passing this group
of islands that line deflects a little toward the south, so that its
course westward is but a little north of west, straight to a point
near to and opposite Las Lajas on the westerly shore of the lake,
southwest from the large island on which Ometepe and Madeira are
located; indeed those two volcanic cones, the former still active,
constitute the entire island. The point called Las Lajas is at the
mouth of a small river of that name which discharges any sensible
amount of water only during the wet season; it is located not more
than 10 miles from Ometepe, and affords a most impressive view of that
perfect volcanic cone rising almost an exact mile above the water. The
general direction of the canal route is a little west of south from Las
Lajas on the lake to Brito on the ocean shore. The line follows the
Las Lajas about a mile and a half only of the 5 miles from the lake in
a southwesterly direction to the point where the continental divide
is crossed. The elevation of the divide at this place is about 145
feet only above sea-level. The line then descends immediately into the
valley of the Rio Grande and follows that stream to its mouth at Brito.

[Illustration: The Maritime Canal Company’s Railroad near Greytown.]

=327. Character of the Country West of the Lake.=—The country on the
west side of the lake exhibits a character radically different from
that on the easterly side, i.e., between the lake and the Caribbean.
It is a country in which much more population is found. While there
are no towns along the 17 miles of the route from Las Lajas to Brito,
the old city Rivas, containing perhaps 12,000 to 15,000 people, is
about 6 miles from Las Lajas, and the small towns of San Jorge, Buenos
Ayres, Potosi, as well as others, are in the same general vicinity.
Plantations of cacao and various tropical fruits abound, and there
is a large amount of land under cultivation. It is largely a cleared
country, so that far less dense forest areas are found.

There are two distinct seasons in the year, the wet and the dry, the
latter extending from about the middle of December to the middle of
May. The annual rainfall is extremely variable, but in the vicinity
of Rivas it may run from 30 or 40 to nearly 100 inches. The country
is of great natural beauty, and one which, under well-administered
governmental control, would afford many places of delightful
residence. The trade winds blow across the lake from east to west with
considerable intensity and great regularity. They produce a beneficial
effect upon the climate and render atmospheric conditions far more
agreeable than in that part of Nicaragua in the vicinity of Greytown.

It will be remembered that Rivas is the city where the American
filibuster Walker was taken prisoner by the Costa Ricans and
Nicaraguans and shot in 1857.

=328. Granada to Managua, thence to Corinto.=—At the northwestern end
of the lake is located the attractive city Granada, sometimes called
the “Boston of Nicaragua.” A reference to a map of Nicaragua will
show that a short distance north of Granada is the river Tipitapa,
which connects Lake Nicaragua with Lake Managua, the latter lying 18
miles to the northwest of the former. A railroad connects Granada
with the city of Managua, which is the capital of Nicaragua, running
on its way through the city of Masaya, chiefly noted for the volcano
of the same name located near by, and which has been subjected to a
most destructive eruption. The old lava-flow still shows its path of
destruction by a broad black mark extending many miles across the
country. A railroad connects Lake Managua at Momotombo with the Pacific
port of Corinto.

=329. General Features of the Route.=—It is thus seen that the proposed
route of the Nicaragua Canal lies first along the valley of the San
Juan River, then across the lake, cutting the continental divide west
of the latter at the low elevation of 145 feet above the sea, thence
following the valley of the Rio Grande to the Pacific Ocean at Brito.
From Greytown to Castillo the San Juan River is the boundary between
Nicaragua and Costa Rica, and concessions from both governments would
be necessary for that part of its construction. From Castillo to the
Pacific Ocean the route lies entirely in Nicaraguan territory, and the
only concession necessary for that portion of the line would be from
the government of Nicaragua. From Castillo to and around the southern
end of the lake the boundary-line is located 3 miles easterly from the
river, following its turns, and the same distance from the lake shore,
all by an agreement recently reached between the two governments. The
summit level of the canal would therefore be the surface of the water
in Lake Nicaragua, which is carried down to Conchuda, 52 miles from
the lake on the San Juan River toward the east, by a great dam located
there, and to a lock between 4 and 5 miles from the lake toward the
west. Hence the summit level would stretch throughout a distance of
about 126 miles, leaving a little more than 46 miles on the Caribbean
end and about 12 miles on the Pacific end of the regular canal section.
The 50-mile stretch from the lake to the point where the canal cuts the
San Juan River near Conchuda is a canalized portion of the San Juan
River, as a large amount of excavation must be done there in order to
give the minimum required depth of 35 feet. The points of river bends
or curves are in some cases cut off by excavated canal section in order
to shorten the line and reduce the curvature. Considerable portions
of the line in the lake, particularly near Fort San Carlos, would be
excavated. For several miles in the latter vicinity large quantities of
silt and mud must be removed, as the lake is shallow and the bottom is
very soft. The entrance into the western portion of the canal at Las
Lajas requires a large amount of rock excavation, as the shore and bed
of the lake there are almost entirely of rock.

[Illustration: Scene on the San Juan River.]

=330. Artificial Harbor at Greytown.=—The preceding observations are
mostly of a general character, and give but little consideration to
the engineering features of the canal construction. In considering
the canal as a carrier of ocean traffic probably the first inquiry
will be that relating to harbors. In reality there is no natural
harbor at either end of the Nicaragua route. Fifty years ago there
was an excellent harbor at Greytown into which ships drawing as much
as 30 feet found ready entrance, and within which was afforded a
well-protected anchorage. As early as that date, however, a point of
land or sand-pit was already pushing its way northward in consequence
of the movement of the sand along the beach in that direction, and
in 1865 it had nearly closed the entrance to the harbor. For many
years that entrance has been entirely closed, and now what was
once the protected harbor of Greytown is a shallow body of water,
completely closed, and known as the Greytown Lagoon. There is a narrow,
circuitous, and shallow channel leading from it out to an opening in
the sand-bar, which may be navigated by boats drawing not more than 2
or 3 feet, and by means of which freight and passengers are taken from
steamers, which are obliged to anchor in the offing. Occasionally heavy
storms break through this strip of sand between Greytown Lagoon and
the ocean, and for a short time form a shallow entrance to the former.
The sand movement in that vicinity northward or westward is so active
that it is but a short time before such openings are again closed.
The deepest water in the lagoon probably does not exceed 8 or 10 feet
at the present time, and the most of it is much shallower. The tidal
action at Greytown is almost nothing, as the range of tide between high
and low is less than 1 foot. The mean level of the Caribbean Sea is the
same as that of the Pacific Ocean.

Under these circumstances it is necessary to create what is practically
a new harbor at Greytown, and that work is contemplated in the plans
of the Isthmian Canal Commission. The canal line is found entering the
lagoon about 1 mile northwest of Greytown, where a harbor is planned
having a length of 2500 feet and a width of 500 feet, increased at
the inner end to 800 feet to provide a turning-basin. The entrance to
this harbor from the ocean will be dredged to a width of 500 feet at
the bottom, and it will be protected outside of the beach-line by two
jetties, the easterly about 3000 feet long, and the westerly somewhat
shorter. These jetties would “be built of loose stone of irregular
shape and size, resting on a suitable foundation,” the largest,
constituting the covering, weighing not less than 10 to 15 tons each.
These jetties would be carried 6 feet above high water and have a top
width of 20 feet. The trade winds, which blow from the easterly and
northeasterly, would have a direction approximately at right angles to
that of the easterly jetty, and ships making the entrance of the canal
would consequently be protected against them while between the jetties.
The easterly of these jetties would act as an obstruction against the
westerly movement of the sand, but it is practically certain that a
considerable amount of the latter would be swept into the channel,
and possibly to some extent into the harbor, necessitating dredging
a considerable portion of the time. The commission estimates that
the maintenance of the entrance and harbor would require an annual
expenditure of $100,000.

=331. Artificial Harbor at Brito.=—The harbor at Brito presents a
problem of a different kind. There is absolutely no semblance of a
harbor there at the present time (1902); it is simply a location on the
sandy beach of the ocean protected against swells from the west by a
projecting rocky point called Brito Head, the Rio Grande River emptying
into the ocean just at the foot of Brito Head, between it and the canal
terminus. The entire harbor and its entrance would be excavated in
the low ground of that vicinity, composed mostly of sand and silt,
although there would be a little rock excavation. The entrance to the
harbor would be dredged 500 feet wide at the bottom, and be protected
by a single jetty on the southeasterly side. The harbor itself would
be excavated back of the present beach; it would have a length of 2200
feet and a width of 800 feet. As the depth of water increases rather
rapidly off shore, the 10-fathom curve is found at about 2200 feet from
low-water mark, hence the jetty would not need to be more than probably
1800 to 2000 feet long. In this vicinity the water is usually smooth;
indeed but few storms annually visit this part of the coast. The
conditions are quite similar to those found on the coast of Southern
California. There is little sand movement in this vicinity, and the
annual expenditures for maintenance of the harbor and entrance would be
relatively small; the commission has estimated them at $50,000.

=332. From Greytown Harbor to Lock No. 2.=—The canal line, on leaving
the harbor at Greytown, is found in low marshy ground for a distance of
about 7 miles, the excavation being mainly through the sand, silt, mud,
and vegetable matter characteristic of that location. Throughout almost
this entire distance the natural surface is but little above sea-level.
The first ground elevated much above this marshy country is known as
the Misterioso Hills, in which Lock No. 1 is founded, having a lift
of 36½ feet and raising the water surface in the canal by that amount
above sea-level. Another stretch of marshy country, but not quite so
wet as the preceding, follows for a distance of about 11 miles, when
the Rio Negro Hills rise abruptly to an elevation of a little over 150
feet above sea-level. At this point is located Lock No. 2, with a lift
of 18½ feet. This lock is about 21 miles from the 6-fathom line off
Greytown. The canal line here practically reaches the San Juan River,
the latter lying a considerable distance easterly of the canal, between
this point and the ocean. Between Greytown and Lock No. 2 embankments,
never reaching a greater height than 10 to 15 feet, are required to
keep the water in the canal at various locations along the low ground.
These embankments do not necessarily follow parallel to the centre
line of the canal route, but are planned to connect hills, or rather
high ground, so as to reduce their length and give them a more stable
character than if they were located close to the canal excavation.
While some embankments will still be found above Lock No. 2, they are
few, and even lower than those already noticed. From Lock No. 2 to Lake
Nicaragua the route of the canal lies practically along the San Juan
River, the chief exception to that statement being the cut-off in the
vicinity of the Conchuda dam.

[Illustration: Lock No. 1, Nicaragua Route, about Seven Miles from
Greytown.]

[Illustration: Telegraph Office at Ochoa on the San Juan River.]

=333. From Lock No. 2 to the Lake.=—Inasmuch as both the Serapiqui and
San Carlos rivers flow from Costa Rican territory into the San Juan,
that is, from its right bank, the canal line necessarily is located
along the northerly or left bank of that river. At a distance of 23
miles from the ocean the canal line cuts through what are called the
Serapiqui Hills opposite the mouth of the river of that name, and at
a distance of a little over 26 miles from the ocean it pierces the
Tamborcito Ridge, where is found the deepest cutting on the entire
route. The total length of cut through this ridge is about 3000 feet,
but its greatest depth is 297 feet, and it consists largely of hard,
basaltic rock. The next lock, or Lock No. 3, is found about 17 miles
from Lock No. 2, or 38 miles from the sea, and it has, like Lock No. 2,
a lift of 18½ feet, raising the surface of the water in the canal to an
elevation of 73½ feet above the sea. Continuous heavy cutting through
what are called the Machado Hills brings the line to Lock No. 4, at
a distance of a little less than 41 miles from the ocean. This lock
has a lift varying from 30.5 to 36.5 feet, inasmuch as it raises the
surface of the water in the canal to the summit level in the lake. The
maximum lift of 36.5 feet would be required when the lake level stands
at an elevation of 110 feet above the sea, and 30.5 feet when the same
surface stands at an elevation of 104 feet above the sea. Although the
water surface in the canal level above this lock is identical with the
summit level in the lake, the canal line again runs through continuous
heavy cutting for a distance of 5 miles before it reaches the canalized
San Juan. This portion of the line between Lock No. 4 and the San Juan
River is called the Conchuda cut-off, for the reason that the point
called Conchuda, where the great dam is located, is but 3 miles down
the river from the point where the canal enters it. From Conchuda
to the lake, as has already been stated, the canal line follows the
course of the San Juan River, which must be canalized by considerable
excavation of earth and rock, both along the bed and in cut-offs. The
greater part of this cutting must obviously be on that portion of the
river toward the lake, as that is the highest part of the river-bed in
its natural condition.

=334. Fort San Carlos to Brito.=—The distance from the point of
entrance of the canal into the San Juan River near Conchuda to Fort
San Carlos on the shore of Lake Nicaragua is about 50 miles, while the
distance across the lake on the canal line is 70.5 miles, which brings
the line to Las Lajas on the southwesterly shore of the lake.

There is considerable heavy cutting through the continental divide
between the lake and the first lock westerly of it, i.e., Lock No. 5.
The maximum cutting is but 76 feet in depth, and the average is but
little less than that for nearly 3 miles. This lock is located a little
less than 10 miles from the lake and nearly 176 miles from the 6-fathom
line off Greytown. The place at which this lock is located is known as
Buen Retiro. The lift of Lock No. 5 varies from 28½ feet as a maximum
to the minimum of 22½ feet, bringing the water surface in the canal
down to 81½ feet above mean ocean level. Lock No. 6 is located but
about 2 miles west of Lock No. 5, and also has a lift of 28½ feet. The
line now runs along the course of the Rio Grande to the ocean, Lock No.
7 being also 2 miles west of Lock No. 6, again with a lift of 28½ feet.
The last lock on the line, or Lock No. 8, but a mile from the Pacific
Ocean, and about 182 miles from the Caribbean Sea, has a maximum lift
of 28½ feet, and a minimum lift of 20½ feet, the range of tide in the
Pacific Ocean being but 8 feet at Brito. There are thus four locks
between the lake and the Pacific Ocean, each having a possible lift of
28½ feet.

[Illustration: Surveying Party of the Isthmian Canal Commission on the
San Juan River.]

The entire distance between the 6-fathom lines in the two oceans is
183.66 miles.

=335. Examinations by Borings.=—Obviously it is of the greatest
importance that such structures as the locks and dams required in
connection with this canal route should be founded on bed-rock. In
order to determine not only such questions, but the character of all
materials to be excavated from one end of the route to the other, a
great number of borings were made along the canal line, not only by the
water-jet process, but also with the diamond drill. By means of the
latter, whenever it was so desired, cores or circular pieces could be
taken out of the bed-rock so as to show precisely its character at all
depths. These borings, both through earthy material by the jet and into
bed-rock by the diamond drill, were made at suitable distances apart
along the centre line of the canal, and in considerable numbers, closer
together at proposed lock and dam sites. By these means every lock on
the line has certainly been located on bed-rock, as well as the great
dam at Conchuda. In addition to this the commission has been able to
classify the material to be excavated, so that if the canal should be
built every contractor would know precisely the character and quantity
of the various materials which he would have to deal with.

=336. Classification and Estimate of Quantities.=—The following table
is arranged to exhibit a few only of the principal items of excavation,
so as to give an approximate idea at least of the magnitude of the work
to be done:

    Dredging                                      130,920,905 cu. yds.
    Dry earth                                      47,440,316    ”
    Soft rock                                      14,029,170    ”
    Hard rock                                      24,151,214    ”
    Rock under water                                2,780,040    ”
    Embankment and back-filling                     8,389,960    ”
    Clearing                                            6,831 acres.
    Stone-pitching                                    250,089 sq. yds.
    Concrete, excluding retaining-walls             3,400,840 cu. yds.
    Concrete in retaining-walls                       424,321    ”
    Cut-stone                                          22,272    ”
    Steel and iron,
          excluding cast-iron culvert lining       61,735,230 lbs.
    Cast-iron culvert lining                       19,286,000  ”
    Brick culvert lining                               34,542 cu. yds.
    Cost of lock machinery                         $1,600,000
    Excavation in coffer-dam                           9,907 cu. yds.
    Pneumatic work                                   145,557    ”
    Piling                                           415,600 lin. ft.
    Rock fill in jetties                             451,500 cu. yds.
    Clay puddle, bottom and side                     936,800    ”

=337. Classification and Unit Prices.=—The classification of the
material to be excavated, both on the Nicaragua and Panama routes, was
one to which the commission gave very thoughtful study no less than to
the prices to be used in making the estimates. The following table,
taken from pages 67 and 68 of the commission’s report, exhibits the
classification and the prices adopted by the commission for purposes of
its estimates:

    Removal of hard rock, per cu. yd.                             $1.15
    Removal of soft rock, per cu. yd.                               .80
    Removal of earth, not handled by dredge, per cu. yd.            .45
    Removal of dredgable material, per cu. yd.                      .20
    Removal of rock, under water, per cu. yd.                      4.75
    Embankments and back-filling, per cu. yd.                       .60
    Rock in jetty construction, per cu. yd.                        2.50
    Stone-pitching, including necessary backing, per sq. yd.       2.00
    Clearing and grubbing in swamp sections of Nicaragua,
                                               per acre          200.00
    Other clearing and grubbing on both routes, per acre         100.00
    Concrete, in place, per cu. yd.                                8.00
    Finished granite, per cu. yd.                                 60.00
    Brick in culvert lining, per cu. yd.                          15.00
    All metal in locks, exclusive of machinery and culvert
       linings, per lb.                                             .075
    All metal in sluices, per lb.                                   .075
    Cast-iron in culvert lining, per lb.                            .04
    Allowance for each lock-chamber for operating machinery   50,000.00
    Additional allowance for each group of locks
               for power-plant                               100,000.00
    Price of timber in locks, per M B. M                         100.00
    Sheet-piling in spillways, per M B. M                         75.00
    Bearing piles in spillways, per lin. ft.                        .50
    Average price of pneumatic work for the Bohio dam, below
      elevation—30, per cu. yd.                                  29.50
    Caisson work for the Conchuda dam, in place, per cu. yd.      20.00
    Single-track railroad complete with switches, stations,
      and rolling stock, per mile of main line                75,000.00

There are evidently other more or less uncertain expenditures,
depending upon all possible conditions affecting the cost of such work,
including those of climate, police, and sanitation. In order to cover
such expenditure the commission determined to add 20 per cent to all
its estimates of cost on both routes, and that percentage was so added
in all cases.

=338. Curvature of the Route.=—Among the engineering features of
a ship-canal line it is evident that curvature is one of great
importance. Small steam-vessels may easily navigate almost any
tortuous channel, but it is not so with great ocean steamships. On the
other hand, it may require very deep and expensive cutting to reduce
the curvature of the route, as curves are usually introduced to carry
the line around some high ground. It is necessary, therefore, to make
a careful and judicious balance between these opposing considerations.
The commission wisely decided to incur even heavy cutting at some
points for the purpose of avoiding troublesome curvature on the
Nicaragua route. The table on page 415, taken from page 135 of the
commission’s report, gives all the elements of curvature for the entire
line.

[Illustration: Boring Party of the Isthmian Canal Commission on a Raft
in the San Juan River.]

From the description of the line as given, it is evident that much
curvature must be found in spite of the most judicious efforts to avoid
it, and the table indicates that condition. Yet the amount of curvature
may be considered moderate for a location through such a country as
Nicaragua. The smallest radius is seen to be a little over 4000 feet.
The result may be considered satisfactory for such a difficult canal
country, although the total amount of curvature is rather formidable.

    +-----------+---------+---------+------------------+
    | Number of | Radius. | Length. | Total Degrees of |
    |  Curves.  |         |         |      Curve.      |
    +-----------+---------+---------+------------------+
    |           |   Feet. |  Miles. |    °     ′    ″  |
    |     2     |  17,189 |   1.53  |    26   51   10  |
    |     8     |  11,459 |   6.80  |   179   31   50  |
    |     4     |   8,594 |   4.31  |   151   40   50  |
    |     1     |   8,385 |   1.43  |    51   44   30  |
    |     2     |   7,814 |   1.90  |    73   28   30  |
    |     1     |   7,759 |   1.73  |    67   16   50  |
    |     5     |   6,876 |   4.64  |   204   34   40  |
    |     2     |   5,927 |   2.40  |   122   41   20  |
    |    16     |   5,730 |  11.08  |   584   47   40  |
    |     2     |   5,289 |   2.27  |   129   45   50  |
    |     1     |   5,209 |   1.15  |    66   38   30  |
    |     2     |   5,056 |   1.22  |    73   17   40  |
    |     1     |   4,982 |    .82  |    49   49   00  |
    |     3     |   4,911 |   2.75  |   169   36   00  |
    |     1     |   4,297 |    .63  |    44   19   50  |
    |     1     |   4,175 |    .81  |    58   20   40  |
    |     4     |   4,045 |   3.82  |   285   25   40  |
    +-----------+---------+---------+------------------+
    |    56     |         |  49.29  | 2,339   50   30  |
    +-----------+---------+---------+------------------+


=339. The Conchuda Dam and Wasteway.=—The most important single
engineering feature of the whole plan is the dam at Conchuda. The
ordinary low-water elevation in the river at the dam site may be taken
at about 55 feet above the sea. Inasmuch as the greatest elevation of
the water in the lake is supposed to be about 110 feet, it will be
seen that its surface will be but 55 feet above the present elevation,
making its maximum depth at that point about 105 feet if there should
be no fill on the up-stream side of the dam, inasmuch as the present
depth of water in the river at the stage assumed is about 50 feet.

This dam would be a structure of concrete masonry with cut-stone facing
only at a few points where it would be advisable to use that material.
A large part of the flood discharge, or the discharge of other surplus
water, would be made over a properly designed crest of the dam; hence
its outline would be that shown in the accompanying figure, shaped
so as to prevent the overflowing sheet of water from damaging the
structure. This dam will be founded upon pneumatic caissons, and the
borings made by the commission show that the deepest of them would
reach satisfactory bed-rock at no greater depth than 25 feet below
sea-level, or about 80 feet below the ordinary stage of water in the
river. The construction of this dam therefore would involve no unusual
operations, but it would all be performed within the more usual and
easy limits of the pneumatic process of constructing foundations. The
masonry crest of this dam would be finished at the elevation of 97
feet above sea-level, or about 13 feet below the highest elevation of
water in the lake. The length of that part of this masonry dam, located
on pneumatic caissons, would be 731 feet, but the total length of the
entire masonry structure would be 1310 feet. The total length of crest,
including the masonry piers on it, over which the surplus waters would
flow, would be 810 feet, but there are twenty piers 9 feet thick, so
that the net length of crest available for overflow of waste-waters
would be about 630 feet. The piers to which reference is made are those
required for the support of the movable gates of the Stoney type which
would be employed to regulate the discharge over the dam. The maximum
elevation of the tops of these piers required for the support and
operation of the Stoney gates is 132 feet above sea-level. The masonry
dam thus furnished with movable gates can be used in times of flood
to prevent the water of the lake rising above about 110 feet above
sea-level. In times of low rainfall or during the dry season the gates
would prevent the escape of water needed for storage.

[Illustration: Castillo Viejo, on the San Juan River, about
thirty-seven miles from the lake and at the Castillo Rapids. The old
fort is shown on the right at the summit of the hill.]

The total available length of crest on this masonry dam is not
sufficient to exercise all the control that is needed to keep the lake
within desired limits, and the commission was obliged to avail itself
of a low depression or saddle between the hills less than a half-mile
easterly of the dam site. The depression affords an additional total
length of crest of 1239 feet, or, taking out thirty-one piers, each 9
feet wide, a net available length of 960 feet, making in combination
with the crest of the main dam a total net available length of 1590
feet. The total wastage over these two structures, i.e., the main dam
at Conchuda and the Conchuda wasteway on the Costa Rican side of the
river, may be at the rate of 100,000 cubic feet per second, with a
maximum depth over the crest of 7 feet, which is sufficient to meet the
demands of the heaviest rainfall in the lake basin.

The plans and elevations on pages 421, 423, and 424 show all the main
features of both the Conchuda dam and wasteway as designed by the
commission.

=340. Regulation of the Lake Level.=—One of the most important
engineering questions connected with the consideration of the Nicaragua
route is that of the regulation or control of the surface of the water
in Lake Nicaragua constituting the summit level of the canal.

As has already been stated, the drainage-basin of the lake, about
12,000 square miles in area, is subjected to an annual wet season
extending from about the middle of May to the middle of December,
the dry season extending over the remaining portion of the year. The
average annual rainfall over the entire lake basin is not accurately
known, although the Isthmian Canal Commission maintained rainfall
records at several points on the lake shore and at other points in the
basin during periods of 1½ to 2 years, and records running back over
periods of perhaps 12 to 15 years are available from Rivas, Granada,
and Masaya. Fortunately, also, both the Nicaragua and the Isthmian
Canal Commissions maintained gauging-stations at various points on the
San Juan throughout the periods of service of these commissions, so
that the discharges of the river could be known from accurate measures
at various seasons for at least two or three years. These observations,
although not as extended as could be desired, yield sufficient data
for a comparatively thorough treatment of the subject of lake-surface
control.

Obviously throughout the rainy season of the year, except during years
of low rainfall, some water would necessarily be wasted from the lake
because its retention would raise the surface of the lake too high,
causing damage, floods, or injurious overflows at various places around
the lake shore. On the other hand, unless some water were stored from
the rainy periods or wet seasons there would not be sufficient in
the lake to supply during the dry period of the year, or during low
rainfall years, the requisite quantity for the wastage of evaporation
from its surface and for the operation of the canal, and at the same
time maintain the minimum depth of water of 35 feet required in the
canal. It was necessary, therefore, to design at least the general
features of such regulating-works as would prevent the lake from rising
too high in wet periods, and from falling too low in dry periods or low
rainfall years.

[Illustration: Village of Fort San Carlos at Entrance to the San Juan
River. Lake Nicaragua is on the right and San Juan River in the middle
ground.]

=341. Evaporation and Lockage.=—The observations of both commissions
show conclusively that the average evaporation from the surface of Lake
Nicaragua is about 60 inches or 5 feet per year, varying from perhaps a
maximum of 6 inches per month to a minimum of possibly about 4 inches
per month. Furthermore, careful estimates of the quantity of water
required for the purposes of the canal, on the supposition that about
10,000,000 tons of traffic would pass through it annually, including
lockage, leakage through the gates of the locks, evaporation, power
purposes, and other incidentals, show that about 1000 cubic feet of
water per second must be provided. Whatever may be the character of the
season, therefore, there must be at least sufficient water stored in
the lake to provide for the wastage of evaporation from the lake and
canal surfaces and for the proper operation of all the locks throughout
the length of the canal. The superficial area of Lake Nicaragua is but
little less than 3000 square miles. The quantity of water required for
the operation of the canal, amounting to 1000 cubic feet per second,
would, for the entire year, make a layer of water over the lake surface
of less than 5 inches in thickness. In other words, the operation of
the canal, for a traffic of about 10,000,000 tons annually, requires an
amount of water less than one twelfth of that which would be evaporated
from the lake surface during the same period.

=342. The Required Slope of the Canalized River Surface.=—The dam
located at Conchuda and fitted with suitable movable gates affords
means of accomplishing the entire lake-surface control. That dam is
located, however, nearly 53 miles from the lake, and in order that the
requisite discharge may take place over it during the rainy season
there must be considerable slope of the water surface in the canalized
river from the lake down to the dam. It was necessary, therefore, to
compute that slope, from data secured by the commission, with the
lake surface at various elevations between the minimum and maximum
permitted. These slopes were found to be such that the difference in
elevations of the surface of the water at the dam and in the lake might
vary from about 6 to 9 feet, those figures representing the total fall
for the distance of 53 miles.

=343. All Surplus Water to be Discharged over the Conchuda Dam.=—The
Nicaragua Commission contemplated the construction of dams not only on
the San Juan River at Boca San Carlos, about 6 miles below Conchuda,
but also another a few miles west of the lake at La Flor, so as to
discharge the surplus waters at both points, but by far the largest
part over the dam at Boca San Carlos. The Isthmian Canal Commission,
however, decided to build no dam on the west side of the lake, but to
discharge all the surplus waters over the dam at Conchuda.

[Illustration: The Active Volcano Ometepe in Lake Nicaragua, showing
Clouds on Leeward Side of the Summit. The crater is nearly eleven miles
from the canal line.]

=344. Control of the Surface Elevation of the Lake.=—The rainfall
records in the lake basin have shown that a dry season beginning
as early as November may be followed by an extremely low rainfall
period, which in turn would be followed by a dry season in natural
sequence, lasting as late as June. It may happen, therefore, that
from November until a year from the succeeding June, constituting a
period of nineteen months, there will be a very meagre rainfall in the
lake basin, during which the precipitation of the seven low rainfall
wet months may not be sufficient even to make good the depletion of
evaporation alone during the same period. It would be necessary, then,
at the end of any wet season whatever, i.e., during the first half of
any December, or in November, to make sure of sufficient storage in the
lake to meet the requirements of the driest nineteen months that can
be anticipated. That condition was assumed by the commission, and the
elements of control of the lake surface, in its plans, are such as to
afford resources to meet precisely those low-water conditions.

[Illustration: Plan of Conchuda Dam Site, showing Location of Boring.]

The commission’s study of these features of the Nicaragua Canal problem
resulted in plans of works to prevent the surface of the lake ever
falling below 104 feet above sea-level, or rarely if ever rising higher
than the elevation of 110 feet above the same level, thus making the
possible range of the lake surface about 6 feet between its lowest and
its highest position.

Obviously at the end of a dry season the gates at the dam will always
be found closed, and there will be no water escaping from the lake
except by evaporation and to supply the needs of canal operation. It
is equally evident that the gates will also remain closed so as to
permit no wastage during the early part of the wet season. As the wet
season proceeds the surface of the lake will rise toward, and generally
quite to its maximum elevation; the operation of wasting over the
weirs will then commence. The time of beginning of this wastage will
depend upon the amount and distribution of the rainfall during the
wet period. Indeed no wastage whatever would be permitted during such
a low-water wet season as that shown by the records of 1890, which
was almost phenomenal in its low precipitation. The rainfall for the
entire drainage-basin would be impounded in the lake in that case, and
it would then fall short of restoring the depletion resulting from
evaporation and requirements of the canal. On the other hand, during
such a wet season as that of 1897 wastage would begin at an early date.
In general it may be said that neither the rate nor the law of the rise
of water surface in the lake can be predicted. There will be years when
no wastage will be permitted, but generally considerable wastage will
be necessary in order to prevent the lake rising above the permissible
highest stage.

[Illustration: Profile of Site of Conchuda Dam showing Borings.]

Detailed computations based upon the statistics of actual rainfall
records in the basin of Lake Nicaragua may be found by referring to
pages 147 to 152 of the Report of the Isthmian Canal Commission, and
they need not be repeated here. Those computations show among other
things that October is often a month of excessive rainfall, and that
the greatest elevation of the lake surface is likely to follow the
precipitation of that month. Hence the greatest discharge of surplus
waters over the Conchuda dam may be expected in consequence of the
resulting run-off or inflow into the lake. Those computations also
show that at long intervals of time the lake surface might reach an
elevation of nearly 112 feet above sea-level for short periods, causing
the discharge in the canalized river or over the Conchuda dam to reach
possibly 76,000 cubic feet per second, the elevation of the water at
the dam being 104 feet above sea-level. Furthermore, the Sabalos River
and one or two other small streams, emptying into the San Juan above
the dam, might concurrently be in flood for at least a few hours and
augment the discharge over the dam to 100,000 cubic feet per second.
The regulating-works at the dam, consisting of the movable (Stoney)
gates, were devised by the commission to afford that rate of discharge,
an aggregate net or available length of overflow crest at the dam and
wasteway of 1590 feet being necessary for that purpose with a depth of
water on the crest not exceeding 7 feet.

[Illustration: CONCHUDA DAM. SECTION SHOWING CAISSONS]

[Illustration: CONCHUDA DAM. DIAGRAM SHOWING ARRANGEMENT OF SLUICE GATE]

The commission states on page 156 of its report:

    “While, therefore, no detailed instructions can be set
    forth regarding the condition of the sluices at the
    wasteway on specified dates, the general lines of their
    operation should be stated below, viz.:

    “1. A full lake with surface probably a little above
        110 feet on December 1.

    “2. Wasteway sluices closed at least from about
        December 1 to some date in the early portion of the
        succeeding rainy season, or throughout that season if
        it be one of unusually low precipitation.

    “3. A variable opening of wasteway sluices, if
        necessary, during the intermediate portion of the rainy
        season, so as to maintain the lake surface elevation
        but little, if any, below 110 at the beginning of
        October.

    “4. The operation of wasteway sluices during October
        and November so as to reach the 1st of December with a
        full lake, or lake elevation probably a little above
        110 feet.”

It is thus seen that while the measures for control and regulation are
entirely feasible, they are not sharply defined, nor so simple that
some experience in their operation might not be needful for the most
satisfactory results.

=345. Greatest Velocities in Canalized River.=—It is necessary to
ascertain whether the velocities induced in the canalized portions
of the San Juan River would not be too high for the convenience of
traffic during the highest rainfall season. The following table and the
succeeding paragraph, taken from the commission’s report, show that no
sensible difficulty of this kind would exist.

    --------------+-------------------------+----------------------
                  |          Elevation of Water at Dam.
    Elevation of  +-------------------------+----------------------
        Lake.     |         103 Feet.       |        104 Feet.
    --------------+------------+------------+-----------+-----------
                  | Feet per   | Miles per  | Feet per  | Miles per
          Feet.   |  Second.   |    Hour.   |  Second.  |   Hour.
           110    |      4.16  |      2.8   |    3.9    |   2.7
           111    |      4.51  |      3.1   |    4.2    |   2.9
           112    |      4.85  |      3.3   |    4.5    |   3.1
    --------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------

“The discharge of the river corresponding to the velocity of 2.7 miles
per hour is 63,200 cubic feet per second; while that corresponding to
3.3 miles per hour is 77,000 cubic feet per second. These estimated
high velocities will occur but rarely, and they will not sensibly
inconvenience navigation. In reality they are too high, for the reason
that while the overflow at the minimum river section materially
increases the areas of those sections, it has been neglected in this
discussion.”

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Brito, at the Pacific Terminus of the Nicaragua Route,
showing the mouth of the Rio Grande on the left and the easterly side
of Brito Head.]

=346. Wasteways or Overflows.=—At a number of places on the route
there are some small streams which must be taken into the canal, and
which when in flood require that certain wasteways or overflows from
the canal prism should be provided at or near where such streams are
received. These wasteways are simply overfall-weirs with the crests
at the elevation of the lowest water surface in the canal prism. The
principal works of this kind are on the east side of the lake and
involve a total drainage area or area of watershed of about 107 square
miles. Ample provision has been made by the commission for all such
structural features.

=347. Temporary Harbors and Service Railroad.=—Before actual work
could be begun at either end of the Nicaragua route temporary harbors
would have to be constructed both at Greytown and at Brito to enable
contractors to land plant and supplies or other material. These
temporary harbors would probably require no greater depth of water
than 18 feet, but they would be works of considerable magnitude, and
provision was made for them in the commission’s estimate of cost.
Again, a service railroad of substantial character would have to be
built from Greytown up to Sabalos, approximately half-way between the
Conchuda dam and Fort San Carlos, as well as from the west shore of the
lake to Brito, making a total line of about 100 miles. The commission
estimated the cost of this railroad and its rolling stock at $75,000
per mile.

=348. Itemized Statement of Length and Cost.=—The following table gives
the lengths of the various portions of the canal and the principal
items of its cost, so arranged as to show the classification of the
various items of the total sum to be expended for all purposes during
the construction of the entire work.

The commission estimated the total time required in preparing for and
performing the actual construction of the work at eight years, but the
writer believes that at least two years more should be allowed for the
work.

    ------------------------------------------------+------+------------
                                                    |Miles.|     Cost.
    ------------------------------------------------+------+------------
    Greytown harbor and entrance                    |  2.15|  $2,198,860
    Section from Greytown harbor to lock No. 1,     |      |
      including approach-wall to lock               |  7.44|   4,899,887
    Diversion of Lower San Juan                     |      |      40,100
    Diversion of San Juanillo                       |      |     116,760
    Lock No. 1, including excavation                |   .20|   5,719,689
    Section from lock No. 1 to lock No. 2, including|      |
      approach-walls, embankments, and wasteway     | 10.96|   6,296,632
    Lock No. 2, including excavation                |   .20|   4,050,270
    Section from lock No. 2 to lock No. 3, including|      |
      approach-walls, embankments, and wasteway     | 16.75|  19,330,654
    Lock No. 3, including excavation                |   .20|   3,832,745
    Section from lock No. 3 to lock No. 4, including|      |
      approach-walls, embankments, and wasteway     |  2.77|   4,310,580
    Lock No. 4, including excavation                |   .20|   5,655,871
    Section from lock No. 4 to San Juan River,      |      |
      including approach-wall and embankments       |  5.30|   8,579,431
    Conchuda dam, including sluices and machinery   |      |   4,017,650
    Auxiliary wasteway, including sluices,          |      |
       machinery, and approach-channels             |      |   2,045,322
    San Juan River section                          | 49.64|  23,155,670
    Lake Nicaragua section                          | 70.51|   7,877,611
    Lake Nicaragua to lock No. 5, including         |      |
      approach-wall to lock and receiving-basins for|      |
       the Rio Grande and Chocolata                 |  9.09|  19,566,575
    Diversion of the Las Lajas                      |      |     199,382
    Lock No. 5, including excavation                |   .20|   4,913,512
    Dam near Buen Retiro                            |      |     125,591
    Section from lock No. 5 to lock No. 6, including|      |
      approach-walls and wasteway                   |  2.04|   3,259,283
    Lock No. 6, including excavation                |   .20|   4,368,667
    Section from lock No. 6 to lock No. 7, including|      |
      approach-walls, embankments, and wasteway     |  1.83|   2,309,710
    Diversion of Rio Grande                         |      |     176,180
    Lock No. 7, including excavation                |   .20|   4,709,502
    Section from lock No. 7 to lock No. 8, including|      |
      approach-walls, embankments, and wasteway     |  2.43|   1,787,496
    Diversion of Rio Grande                         |      |     117,580
    Lock No. 8, including excavation                |   .20|   4,920,899
    Section from lock No. 8 to Brito harbor,        |      |
      including approach-wall                       |   .23|     553,476
    Brito harbor and entrance, including jetty      |   .92|   1,509,470
    Railroad, including branch line to Conchuda     |      |
      dam site, at $75,000 per mile                 |      |   7,575,000
    Engineering, police, sanitation, and general    |      |
      contingencies, 20 per cent.                   |      |   1,644,010
                                                    +------+------------
      Aggregate                                     |183.66|$189,864,062
    ------------------------------------------------+------+------------




PART VI.

_THE PANAMA ROUTE FOR A SHIP-CANAL._


=349. The First Panama Transit Line.=—The Panama route as a line
of transit across the isthmus was established, as near as can be
determined, between 1517 and 1520. The first settlement, at the site
of the town of old Panama, 6 or 7 miles easterly of the present city
of that name, was begun in August, 1517. This was the Pacific end of
the line. The Atlantic end was finally established in 1519 at Nombre
de Dios, the more easterly port of Acla, where Balboa was tried and
executed, having first been selected but subsequently rejected.

The old town of Panama was made a city by royal decree from the throne
of Spain in September, 1521. At the same time it was given a coat of
arms and special privileges were conferred upon it. The course of
travel then established ran by a road well known at the present time
through a small place called Cruces on the river Chagres, about 17
miles distant from Panama. It must have been an excellent road for
those days. Bridges were even laid across streams and the surface was
paved, although probably rather crudely. According to some accounts it
was only wide enough for use by beasts of burden, but some have stated
that it was wide enough to enable two carts to pass each other.

=350. Harbor of Porto Bello Established in 1597.=—The harbor of
the Atlantic terminus at Nombre de Dios did not prove entirely
satisfactory, and Porto Bello, westerly of the former point, was made
the Atlantic port in 1597 for this isthmian line of transit. The harbor
of Porto Bello is excellent, and the location was more healthful,
although Porto Bello itself was subsequently abandoned, largely on
account of its unhealthfulness.

[Illustration: PROFILE OF PANAMA ROUTE]

[Illustration: PROFILE OF NICARAGUA ROUTE

Profiles of the two Canal Routes. The horizontal scales are different,
but the vertical scales are the same.]

=351. First Traffic along the Chagres River, and the Importance of the
Isthmian Commerce.=—As early as 1534, or soon after that date, boats
began to pass up and down the Chagres River between Cruces and its
mouth on the Caribbean shore, and thence along the coast to Nombre de
Dios and subsequently to Porto Bello. The importance of the commerce
which sprang up across the isthmus and in connection with this isthmian
route is well set forth in the last paragraph on page 28 of the report
of the Isthmian Canal Commission:

“The commerce of the isthmus increased during the century and Panama
became a place of great mercantile importance, with a profitable trade
extending to the Spice Islands and the Asiatic coast. It was at the
height of its prosperity in 1585, and was called with good reason
the toll-gate between western Europe and eastern Asia. Meanwhile the
commerce whose tolls only brought such benefits to Panama enriched
Spain, and her people were generously rewarded for the aid given by
Ferdinand and Isabella in the effort to open a direct route westward to
Cathay, notwithstanding the disadvantages of the isthmian transit.”

=352. First Survey for Isthmian Canal Ordered in 1520.=—This commercial
prosperity suggested to those interested in it, and soon after its
beginning, the possibility of a ship-canal to connect the waters of the
two oceans. It is stated even that Charles V. directed that a survey
should be made for the purpose of determining the feasibility of such
a work as early as 1520. “The governor, Pascual Andagoya, reported
that such a work was impracticable and that no king, however powerful
he might be, was capable of forming a junction of the two seas or of
furnishing the means of carrying out such an undertaking.”

=353. Old Panama Sacked by Morgan and the Present City Founded.=—From
that time on the city of Panama increased in wealth and population in
consequence of its commercial importance. Trade was established with
the west coast of South America and with the ports on the Pacific
coast of Central America. In spite of the fact that it was made by
the Spaniards a fortress second in strength in America only to old
Cartagena, it was sacked and burned by Morgan’s buccaneers in February,
1671. The new city, that is the present city, was founded in 1673, it
not being considered advisable to rebuild on the old site.

[Illustration: View of the Harbor of Colon.]

=354. The Beginnings of the French Enterprise.=—The project of a
canal on this route was kept alive for more than three centuries by
agitation sometimes active and sometimes apparently dying out for
long periods, until there was organized in Paris, in 1876, a company
entitled “Société Civile Internationale du Canal Interocéanique,” with
Gen. Etienne Türr as president, for the purpose of making surveys and
explorations for a ship-canal between the two oceans on this route.

=355. The Wyse Concession and International Congress of 1879.=—The work
on the isthmus for this company was prosecuted under the direction
of Lieut. L. N. B. Wyse, a French naval officer, and he obtained for
his company in 1878 a concession from the Colombian Government,
conferring the requisite rights and privileges for the construction of
a ship-canal on the Panama route and the authority to do such other
things as might be necessary or advisable in connection with that
project. This concession is ordinarily known as the Wyse concession.

A general plan for this transisthmian canal was the subject of
consideration at an international scientific congress convened in Paris
in May, 1879, and composed of 135 delegates from France, Germany, Great
Britain, the United States, and other countries, but the majority of
whom were French. This congress was convened under the auspices of
Ferdinand de Lesseps, and after remaining in session for two weeks a
decision, not unanimous, was reached that an international canal ought
to be located on the Panama route, and that it should be a sea-level
canal without locks. The fact was apparently overlooked that the range
between high and low tides in the Bay of Panama, about 20 feet, was so
great as to require a tidal lock at that terminus.

=356. The Plan without Locks of the Old Panama Canal Company.=—A
company entitled “Compagnie Universelle du Canal Interocéanique”
was organized, with Ferdinand de Lesseps as president, immediately
after the adjournment of the international congress. The purpose of
this company was the construction and operation of the canal, and it
purchased the Wyse concession from the original company for the sum
of 10,000,000 francs. An immediate but unsuccessful attempt was made
to finance the company in August, 1879. This necessitated a second
attempt, which was made in December, 1880, with success, as the entire
issue of 600,000 shares of 500 francs each was sold. Two years were
then devoted to examinations and surveys and preliminary work upon the
canal, but it was 1883 before operations upon a large scale were begun.
The plan adopted and followed by this company was that of a sea-level
canal, affording a depth of 29.5 feet and a bottom width of 72 feet. It
was estimated that the necessary excavation would amount to 157,000,000
cubic yards.

The Atlantic terminus of this canal route was located at Colon,
and at Panama on the Pacific side. The line passed through the low
grounds just north of Monkey Hill to Gatun, 6 miles from the Atlantic
terminus, and where it first met the Chagres River. For a distance
of 21 miles it followed the general course of the Chagres to Obispo,
but left it at the latter point and passing up the valley of a small
tributary cut through the continental divide at Culebra, and descended
thence by the valley of the Rio Grande to the mouth of that river where
it enters Panama Bay. The total length of this line from 30 feet depth
in the Atlantic to the same depth in the Pacific was about 47 miles.
The maximum height of the continental divide on the centre line of the
canal in the Culebra cut was about 333 feet above the sea, which is a
little higher than the lowest point of the divide in that vicinity.
Important considerations in connection with the adjacent alignment made
it advisable to cut the divide at a point not its lowest.

[Illustration: Old Dredges near Colon.]

=357. The Control of the Floods in the Chagres.=—Various schemes were
proposed for the purpose of controlling the floods of the Chagres
River, the suddenness and magnitude of which were at once recognized as
among the greatest difficulties to be encountered in the construction
of the work. Although it was seriously proposed at one time to control
this difficulty by building a dam across the Chagres at Gamboa, that
plan was never adopted, and the problem of control of the Chagres
floods remained unsolved for a long period.

=358. Estimate of Time and Cost—Appointment of Liquidators.=—It was
estimated by de Lesseps in 1880 that eight years would be required for
the completion of the canal, and that its cost would be $127,600,000.
The company prosecuted its work with activity until the latter part of
1887, when it became evident that the sea-level plan of canal was not
feasible with the resources at its command. Changes were soon made in
the plans, and it was concluded to expedite the completion of the canal
by the introduction of locks, deferring the change to a sea-level canal
until some period when conditions would be sufficiently favorable to
enable the company to attain that end. Work was prosecuted under this
modified plan until 1889, when the company became bankrupt and was
dissolved by judgment of the French court called the Tribunal Civil
de la Seine, on February 4, 1889. An officer, called the liquidator,
corresponding quite closely to a receiver in this country, was
appointed by the court to take charge of the company’s affairs. At
no time was the project of completing the canal abandoned, but the
liquidator gradually curtailed operations and finally suspended the
work on May 15, 1889.

=359. The “Commission d’Etude.”=—He determined to take into careful
consideration the feasibility of the project, and to that end appointed
a “commission d’études,” composed of eleven French and foreign
engineers, headed by Inspector-General Guillemain, director of the
_Ecole Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées_. This commission visited
the isthmus and made a careful study of the entire enterprise, and
subsequently submitted a plan for the canal involving locks. The cost
of completing the entire work was estimated to be $112,500,000, but
the sum of $62,100,000 more was added to cover administration and
financing, making a total of $174,600,000. This commission also gave
an approximate estimate of the value of the work done and of the plant
at $87,300,000, to which some have attached much more importance than
did the commission itself. The latter appears simply to have made the
“estimate” one half of the total cost of completing the work added to
that of financing and administration, as a loose approximation, calling
it an “intuitive estimate”; in other words, it was simply a guess
based upon such information as had been gained in connection with the
work done on the isthmus.

[Illustration: The Partially Completed Panama Canal, about eight miles
from Colon.]

=360. Extensions of Time for Completion.=—By this time the period
specified for completion under the original Wyse concession had nearly
expired. The liquidator then sought from the Colombian Government an
extension of ten years, which was granted under the Colombian law dated
December 26, 1890. This extension was based upon the provision that a
new company should be formed and work on the canal resumed not later
than February 28, 1893. The latter condition was not fulfilled, and a
second extension was obtained on April 4, 1893, which provided that the
ten-year extension of time granted in 1890 might begin to run at any
time prior to October 31, 1894, but not later than that date. When it
became apparent that the provisions of this last extension would not
be carried out an agreement between the Colombian Government and the
new Panama Company was entered into on April 26, 1900, which extended
the time of completion to October 31, 1910. The validity of this last
extension of time has been questioned.

=361. Organization of the New Panama Canal Company, 1894.=—A new
company, commonly known as the new Panama Canal Company, was organized
on the 20th of October, 1894, with a capital stock of 650,000 shares
of 100 francs each. Under the provisions of the agreement of December
26, 1890, authorizing an extension of time for the construction of
the canal, 50,000 shares passed as full-paid stock to the Colombian
Government, leaving the actual working capital of the new Panama
Company at 60,000,000 francs, that amount having been subscribed in
cash. The most of this capital stock was subscribed for by certain
loan associations, administrator, contractors, and others against whom
suits had been brought in consequence of the financial difficulties
of the old company, it having been charged in the scandals attending
bankruptcy proceedings that they had profited illegally. Those suits
were discontinued under agreements to subscribe by the parties
interested to the capital stock of the new company. The sums thus
obtained constituted more than two thirds of the 60,000,000 francs
remaining of the share capital of the new company after the Colombian
Government received its 50,000 shares. The old company had raised by
the sale of stock and bond not far from $246,000,000, and the number
of persons holding the securities thus sold has been estimated at over
200,000.

=362. Priority of the Panama Railroad Concession.=—The Panama Railroad
Company holds a concession from the Colombian Government giving it
rights prior to those of the Wyse concession, so that the latter could
not become effective without the concurrence of the Panama Railroad
Company. This is shown by the language of Article III of the Wyse
concession, which reads as follows:

“If the line of the canal to be constructed from sea to sea should
pass to the west and to the north of the imaginary straight line which
joins Cape Tiburon with Garachine Point, the grantees must enter into
some amicable arrangement with the Panama Railroad Company or pay an
indemnity, which shall be established in accordance with the provisions
of Law 46 of August 16, 1867, ‘approving the contract celebration on
July 5, 1867, reformatory of the contract of April 15, 1850, for the
construction of an iron railroad from one ocean to the other through
the Isthmus of Panama.’” It became necessary, therefore, in order to
control this feature of the situation, for the old Panama Company
to secure at least a majority of the stock of the Panama Railroad
Company. As a matter of fact the old Panama Canal Company purchased
nearly 69,000 out of the 70,000 shares of the Panama Railroad Company,
each such share having a par value of $100. These shares of Panama
railroad stock are now held in trust for the benefit of the new Panama
Canal Company. A part of the expenditures of the old company therefore
covered the cost of the Panama Railroad Company’s shares, now held in
trust for the benefit of the new company.

=363. Resumption of Work by the New Company—The Engineering Commission
and the Comité Technique.=—Immediately after its organization the new
Panama Canal Company resumed the work of excavation in the Emperador
and Culebra cuts with a force of men which has been reported as
varying between 1900 and 3600. It also gave thorough consideration
to the subject of the best plan for the completion of the canal. The
company’s charter provided for the appointment of a special engineering
commission of five members by the company and the liquidator to report
upon the work done and the conclusions to be drawn from its study. This
report was to be rendered when the amount expended by the new company
should reach about one half of its capital. At the same time the
company also appointed a “Comité Technique,” constituted of fourteen
eminent European and American engineers, to make a study of the entire
project, which was to avail itself of existing data and the results of
such other additional surveys and examinations as it might consider
necessary. The report rendered by this committee was elaborate, and it
was made November 16, 1898. It was referred to the statutory commission
of five to which reference has already been made, which commission
reported in 1899 that the canal could be constructed within the limits
of time and money estimated. On December 30, 1899, a special meeting
of the stockholders of the new company was called, but the liquidator,
who was one of the largest stockholders, declined to take part in it,
and the report consequently has not received the required statutory
consideration.

[Illustration: The Excavation at the Bohio Lock Site.]

=364. Plan of the New Company.=—The plan adopted by the company placed
the minimum elevation of the summit level of the canal at 97½ feet
above the sea, and a maximum at 102½ feet above the same datum. It
provided for a depth of 29½ feet of water and a bottom width of canal
prism of about 98 feet, except at special places where this width was
increased. A dam was to be built near Bohio, which would thus form an
artificial lake with its surface varying from 52.5 to 65.6 feet above
the sea. Under this plan there would be a flight of two locks at
Bohio, about 16 miles from the Atlantic end of the canal, and another
flight of two locks at Obispo about 14 miles from Bohio, thus reaching
the summit level, a single lock at Paraiso, between 6 and 7 miles from
Obispo, a flight of two locks at Pedro Miguel about 1.25 miles from
Paraiso, and finally a single lock at Miraflores, a mile and a quarter
from Pedro Miguel, bringing the canal down to the ocean elevation.
The location of this line was practically the same as that of the
old company. The available length of each lock-chamber was 738 feet,
while the available width was 82 feet, the depth in the clear being
32 feet 10 inches. The lifts were to vary from 26 to 33 feet. It was
estimated that the cost of finishing the canal on this plan would be
$101,850,000, exclusive of administration and financing.

In order to control the floods of the Chagres River, and to furnish a
supply of water for the summit level of the canal, a dam was planned to
be built at a point called Alhajuela, about 12 miles from Obispo, from
which a feeder about 10 miles long, partly an open canal and partly in
tunnels or pipe, would conduct the water from the reservoir thus formed
to the summit level.

=365. Alternative Plan of the New Panama Canal Company.=—Although
the plan as described was adopted, the “Comité Technique” apparently
favored a modification by which a much deeper excavation through
Culebra Hill would be made, thus omitting the locks at both Obispo and
Paraiso, and making the level of the artificial Lake Bohio the summit
level of the canal. In this modified plan the bottom of the summit
level would be about 32 feet above the sea, and the minimum elevation
of the summit level 61.5 feet above the sea. This modification of plan
had the material advantage of eliminating both the Obispo and Paraiso
locks. The total estimated cost of completing the canal under this plan
was about $105,500,000. Although the Alhajuela feeder would be omitted,
the Alhajuela reservoir would be retained as an agent for controlling
the Chagres floods and to form a reserve water-supply. The difference
in cost of these two plans was comparatively small, but the additional
time required to complete that with the lower summit level was probably
one of the main considerations in its rejection by the committee having
it under consideration.

=366. The Isthmian Canal Commission and its Work.=—This brings
the project up to the time when the Isthmian Canal Commission was
created in 1899 and when the forces of the new Panama Canal Company
were employed either in taking care of the enormous amount of plant
bequeathed to it by the old company or in the great excavation at
Emperador and Culebra. The total excavation of all classes, made up to
the time when that commission rendered its report, amounted to about
77,000,000 cubic yards.

The work of the commission consisted of a comprehensive and detailed
examination of the entire project and all its accessories, as
contemplated by the new Panama Canal Company, and any modifications of
its plans, either as to alignment, elevations, or subsidiary works,
which it might determine advisable to recommend. In the execution of
this work it was necessary, among other things, to send engineering
parties on the line of the Panama route for the purpose of making
surveys and examinations necessary to confirm estimates of the new
Panama Canal Company as to quantities, elevations, or other physical
features of the line selected, or required in modifications of
alignment or plans. In order to accomplish this portion of its work the
commission placed five working parties on the Panama route with twenty
engineers and other assistants and forty-one laborers.

[Illustration: The French Location for the Bohio Dam.]

=367. The Route of the Isthmian Canal Commission that of the New
Panama Canal Company.=—The commission adopted for the purposes of
its plans and estimates the route selected by the new Panama Canal
Company, which is essentially that of the old company. Starting from
the 6-fathom contour in the harbor of Colon, the line follows the low
marshy ground adjoining the Bay of Limon to its intersection with the
Mindi River; thence through the low ground continuing to Gatun, about
6 miles from Colon, where it first meets the Chagres River. From this
point to Obispo the canal line follows practically the general course
of the Chagres River, although at one point in the marshes below Bohio
it is nearly 2 miles from the farthest bend in the river, at a small
place called Ahorca Lagarto. Bohio is about 17 miles from the Atlantic
terminus, and Obispo about 30 miles. At the latter point the course of
the Chagres River, passing up-stream, lies to the northeast, while the
general direction of the canal line is southeast toward Panama, the
latter leaving the former at this location. The canal route follows up
the general course of a small stream called the Camacho for a distance
of nearly 5 miles where the continental divide is found, and in which
the great Culebra cut is located, about 36 miles from Colon and 13
miles from the Panama terminus. After passing through the Culebra cut
the canal route follows the course of the Rio Grande River to its mouth
at Panama Bay. The mouth of the Rio Grande, where the canal line is
located, is about a mile and a half westerly of the city of Panama. The
Rio Grande is a small, sluggish stream throughout the last 6 miles of
its course, and for that distance the canal excavation would be made
mostly in soft silt or mud.

Although the line selected by the French company is that adopted by the
Isthmian Canal Company for its purposes, a number of most important
features of the general plan have been materially modified by the
commission, as will be easily understood from what has already been
stated in connection with the French plans.

=368. Plan for a Sea-level Canal.=—The feasibility of a sea-level
canal, but with a tidal lock at the Panama end, was carefully
considered by the commission, and an approximate estimate of the
cost of completing the work on that plan was made. In round numbers
this estimated cost was about $250,000,000, and the time required to
complete the work would probably be nearly or quite twice that needed
for the construction of a canal with locks. The commission therefore
adopted a project for the canal with locks. Both plans and estimates
were carefully developed in accordance therewith.

=369. Colon Harbor and Canal Entrance.=—The harbor of Colon has been
fairly satisfactory for the commerce of that port, but it is open to
the north, and there are probably two or three days in every year
during which northers blow into the harbor with such intensity that
ships anchored there must put to sea in order to escape damage.
The western limit of this harbor is an artificial point of land
formed by material deposited by the old Panama Canal Company; it
is called Christoph Colon, and near its extreme end are two large
frame residences built for de Lesseps. The entrance to the canal is
immediately south of this artificial point. The commission projected a
canal entrance from the 6-fathom contour in the Bay of Limon, in which
the harbor of Colon is found, swinging on a gentle curve, 6560 feet
radius, to the left around behind the artificial point just mentioned
and then across the shore line to the right into the lowland southerly
of Colon. This channel has a width of 500 feet at the bottom, with
side slopes of 1 on 3, except on the second curve, which is somewhat
sharper than the first, where the bottom width is made 800 feet for a
length of 800 feet for the purpose of a turning-basin. This brings the
line into the canal proper, forming a well-protected harbor for nearly
a mile inside of the shore line. The distance from the 6-fathom line to
this interior harbor is about 2 miles. The total cost of constructing
the channel into the harbor and the harbor itself is $8,057,707, and
the annual cost of maintenance is placed at $30,000. The harbor would
be perfectly protected from the northers which occasionally blow with
such intensity in the Bay of Limon, and it could readily be made in all
weathers by vessels seeking it.

=370. Panama Harbor and Entrance to Canal.=—The harbor at the Pacific
end of the channel where it joins Panama Bay is of an entirely
different character in some respects. The Bay of Panama is a place
of light winds. Indeed it has been asserted that the difficulties
sometimes experienced by sailing-vessels in finding wind enough to
take them out of Panama Bay are so serious as to constitute a material
objection to the location for a ship-canal on the Panama route. This
difficulty undoubtedly exists at times, but the simple fact is to be
remembered that Panama was a port for sailing-ships for more than two
hundred years before a steamship was known. The harbor of Panama, as
it now exists, is a large area of water at the extreme northern limit
of the bay, immediately adjacent to the city of Panama, protected from
the south by the three islands of Perico, Naos, and Culebra. It has
been called a roadstead. There is good anchorage for heavy-draft ships,
but for the most part the water is shallow. With the commission’s
requirement of a minimum depth of water of 35 feet, a channel about 4
miles long from the mouth of the Rio Grande to the 6-fathom line in
Panama Bay must be excavated. This channel would have a bottom width
of 200 feet with side slopes of 1 on 3 where the material is soft.
Considerable rock would have to be excavated in this channel. At 4.41
miles from the 6-fathom line is located a wharf at the point called La
Boca. A branch of the Panama Railroad Company runs to this wharf, and
at the present time deep-draft ships lie up alongside of it to take on
and discharge cargo. The wharf is a steel frame structure, founded upon
steel cylinders, carried down to bed-rock by the pneumatic process.
Its cost was about $1,284,000. The total cost of the excavated channel
leading from Panama harbor to the pier at La Boca is estimated by the
commission at $1,464,513. As the harbor at Panama is considered an open
roadstead, it requires no estimate for annual cost of maintenance.

[Illustration: The Bohio Dam Site.]

=371. The Route from Colon to Bohio.=—Starting from the harbor of
Colon, the prism of the canal is excavated through the low and for the
most part marshy ground to the little village called Bohio. The prism
would cut the Chagres River at a number of points, and would require a
diversion-channel for that river for a distance of about 5 miles on the
westerly side of the canal. Levees, or protective embankments, would
also be required on the same side of the canal between Bohio and Gatun,
the Chagres River leaving the canal line at the latter point on its way
to the sea.

=372. The Bohio Dam.=—The principal engineering feature of the entire
route is found at Bohio; it is the great dam across the Chagres River
at that point, forming Lake Bohio, the summit level of the canal. The
new Panama Canal Company located this dam at a point about 17 miles
from Colon, and designed to make it an earth structure suitably paved
on its faces, but without any other masonry feature. Some borings had
been made along the site, and test-pits were also dug by the French
engineers. It was the conviction of the Isthmian Canal Commission,
however, that the character of the proposed dam might be affected
by a further examination of the subsurface material at the site.
Consequently the boring parties of the Commission sunk a large number
of bore-holes at six different sections or possible sites along the
river in the vicinity of the French location. These borings revealed
great irregularity in the character and disposition of the material
below the bed and banks of the river. In some places the upper stratum
of material was almost clear clay, and in other places clear sand,
while all degrees of admixture of clay and sand were also found. At
the French site the bed-rock at the deepest point is 143 feet below
sea-level, with large masses of pervious and semi-pervious sand,
gravel, and mixtures of those materials with clay. Apparently there is
a geological valley in the rock along the general course of the Chagres
River in this vicinity filled with sand, gravel, and clay, irregularly
distributed and with all degrees of admixture, large masses in all
cases being of open texture and pervious to water. The site adopted by
the commission for the purposes of its plans and estimates is located
nearly half a mile down the course of the river from that selected by
the new Panama Canal Company. The geological valley is nearly 2000 feet
wide at this location, but the deepest rock disclosed by the borings
of the commission is but 128 feet below sea-level. The actual channel
of the river is not more than 150 feet wide and lies on the extreme
easterly side of the valley. The easterly or right bank of the river at
this place is clean rock and rises abruptly to an elevation of about 40
feet above the river surface at ordinary stages. The left or westerly
bank of the river is compacted clay and sand, and rises equally as
abruptly as the rocky bank of the other side, and to about the same
elevation. From the top of the abrupt sandy clay bank a plateau of
rather remarkable uniformity of elevation extends for about 1200 feet
in a southwesterly direction to the rocky hill in which the Bohio
locks would be located. The rock slope on the easterly or northerly
bank of the river runs down under the sandy river-bed, but at such an
inclination that within the limits of the channel the deepest rock is
less than 100 feet below sea-level.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Profile of Bohio Dam Site, selected for Plans and
Estimate, with section of Dam.]

After the completion of all its examinations and after a careful study
of the data disclosed by them, the commission deemed it advisable to
plan such a dam as would cut off absolutely all possible subsurface
flow or seepage through the sand and gravel below the river surface.
It is to be observed that such a subsurface flow might either disturb
the stability of an earth dam or endanger the water-supply of the
summit level of the canal or both. The plan of dam finally adopted
by the commission for the purposes of its estimates is shown by the
accompanying plans and sections. A heavy core-wall of concrete masonry
extends from bed-rock across the entire geological valley to the top
of the structure, or to an elevation of 100 feet above sea-level, thus
absolutely closing the entire valley against any possible flow. The
thickness of this wall at the bottom is 30 feet, but at an elevation
of 30 feet below sea-level its sides begin to batter at such a rate as
to make the thickness of the wall 8 feet at its top. On either side of
this wall are heavy masses of earth embankment of selected material
properly deposited in layers with surface slopes of 1 on 3. As shown
by the plans, the lower portions of the core-wall of this dam would
be sunk to bed-rock by the pneumatic process, the joints between the
caissons being closed and sealed by cylinders sunk in recesses or
wells, also as shown by the plans.

=373. Variation in Surface Elevation of Lake.=—The profile of this
route shows that the summit level would have an ordinary elevation of
85 feet above the sea, but it may be drawn down for uses of the canal
to a minimum elevation of 82 feet above the same datum. On the other
hand, under circumstances to be discussed later, it may rise during
the floods of the Chagres to an elevation of 90 or possibly 91 or 92
feet above the level of the sea. The top of the dam therefore would be
from 8 to 10 feet above the highest possible water surface in the lake,
which is sufficient to guard against wash or overtopping of the dam by
waves. The total width of the dam at its top would be 20 feet, and the
entire inner slope would be paved with heavy riprap suitably placed and
bedded.

=374. Extent of Lake Bohio and the Canal Line in It.=—This dam would
create an artificial lake having a superficial area during high water
of about 40 square miles. The water would be backed up to a point
called Alhajuela, about 25 miles up the river from Bohio. For a
distance of nearly 14 miles, i.e., from Bohio to Obispo, the route of
the canal would lie in this lake. Although the water would be from 80
to 90 feet deep at the dam for several miles below Obispo, it would
be necessary to make some excavation along the general course of
the Chagres in order to secure the minimum depth of 35 feet for the
navigable channel.

[Illustration: Location of the Proposed Alhajuela Dam on the Upper
Chagres.]

=375. The Floods of the Chagres.=—The feature of Lake Bohio of the
greatest importance to the safe and convenient operation of the canal
is that by which the floods of the river Chagres are controlled or
regulated. That river is but little less than 150 miles long, and its
drainage area as nearly as can be estimated, contains about 875 square
miles. Above Bohio its current moves some sand and a little silt in
times of flood, but usually it is a clear-water stream. In low water
its discharge may fall to 350 cubic feet per second.

As is well known, the floods of the Chagres have at times been regarded
as almost if not quite insurmountable obstacles to the construction
of a canal on this line. The greatest flood of which there is any
semblance of a reliable record is one which occurred in 1879. No direct
measurements were made, but it is stated with apparent authority that
the flood elevation at Bohio was 39.3 feet above low water. If the
total channel through which the flood flowed at that time had been as
large as at present, actual gaugings or measurements of subsequent
floods show that the maximum discharge in 1879 might have been at the
rate of 136,000 cubic feet per second. As a matter of fact the total
channel section in that year was less than it is at the present time.
Hence if it be assumed that a flood of 140,000 cubic feet per second
must be controlled, an error on the safe side will be committed. Other
great floods of which there are reliable records are as follows:

    1885  Height at Bohio 33.8 feet above low water.
    1888:   ”    ”    ”   34.7  ”     ”    ”    ”
    1890:   ”    ”    ”   32.1  ”     ”    ”    ”
    1893:   ”    ”    ”   28.5  ”     ”    ”    ”

The maximum measured rate of the 1890 flood was 74,998 cubic feet per
second, and that of 1893, 48,975 cubic feet per second. It is clear,
therefore, that a flood-flow of 75,000 cubic feet per second is very
rare, and that a flood of 140,000 cubic feet per second exceeds that of
which we have any record for practically forty years.

=376. The Gigante Spillway or Waste-weir.=—It is obvious that the dam,
as designed by the commission, is of such character that no water must
be permitted to flow over its crest, or even in immediate proximity to
the down-stream embankment. Indeed it is not intended by the commission
that there shall be any wasteway or discharge anywhere near the dam. At
a point about 3 miles southwest of the site of the dam at Bohio is a
low saddle or notch in the hills near the head-waters of a small stream
called the Gigante River. The elevation of this saddle or notch is such
that a solid masonry weir with a crest 2000 feet long may readily be
constructed with its foundations on bed-rock without deep excavation.
This structure is called the Gigante spillway, and all surplus
flood-waters from the Chagres would flow over it. The waters discharged
would flow down to and through some large marshes, one called Peña
Blanca and another Agua Clara, before rejoining the Chagres. Inasmuch
as the canal line runs just easterly of those marshes, it would be
necessary to protect it with the levees or embankments to which
allusion has already been made. These embankments are neither much
extended nor very costly for such a project. The protection of the
canal would be further aided by a short artificial channel between the
two marshes, Peña Blanca and Agua Clara, for which provision is made
in the estimates of the commission. After the surplus waters from the
Gigante spillway pass these marshes they again enter the Chagres River
or flow over the low, half-submerged country along its borders, and
thence through its mouth to the sea near the town of Chagres, about 6
miles northwest of Gatun.

=377. Storage in Lake Bohio for Driest Dry Season.=—The masonry crest
of the Gigante spillway would be placed at an elevation of 85 feet
above the sea, identically the same as that which may be called the
normal summit level of the canal. It is estimated that the total uses
of water in the canal added to the loss by evaporation, taken at six
inches in depth per month, from the surface of the lake will amount
to about 1070 cubic feet per second if the traffic through the canal
should amount to 10,000,000 tons per annum in ships of ordinary size.
This draft per second is the sum of 406 cubic feet per second for
lockage, 207 for evaporation, 250 for leakage at lock-gates, and 200
for power and other purposes, making a total of 1063, which has been
taken as 1070 cubic feet per second. The amount of storage in Lake
Bohio between the elevations of 85 and 82 feet above sea-level, as
designed, is sufficient to supply the needs of that traffic in excess
of the smallest recorded low-water flow of the Chagres River during the
dry season of a low rainfall year. The lowest monthly average flow of
the Chagres on record at Bohio is 600 cubic feet per second for March,
1891, and for the purposes of this computation that minimum flow has
been supposed to continue for three months. This includes a sensible
margin of safety. In not even the driest year, therefore, can it be
reasonably expected that the summit level of the canal would fall below
the elevation of 82 feet until the total traffic of the canal carried
in ships of the present ordinary size shall exceed 10,000,000 tons.
If the average size of ships continues to increase, as will probably
be the case, less water in proportion to tonnage will be required for
the purposes of lockage. This follows from the fact that with a given
tonnage the greater the capacity of the ships the less the number
required, and consequently the less will be the number of lockages made.

[Illustration: The Eastern Face of the Culebra Cut.]

=378. Lake Bohio as a Flood controller.=—On the other hand it can be
shown that with a depth of 5 feet of water on the crest of the Gigante
spillway the discharge of that weir 2000 feet long will be at the rate
of 78,260 cubic feet per second. If the flood-waters of the Chagres
should flow into Lake Bohio until the head of water on the crest of
the Gigante weir rises to 7½ feet, the rate of discharge over that
weir would be 140,000 cubic feet per second, which, as already shown,
exceeds at least by a little the highest flood-rate on record. The
operation of Lake Bohio as a flood controller or regulator is therefore
exceedingly simple. The flood-waters of the Chagres would pour into the
lake and immediately begin to flow over the Gigante weir, and continue
to do so at an increasing rate as the flood continues. The discharge
of the weir is augmented by the increasing flood, and decreases only
after the passage of the crest of the flood-wave. No flood even as
great as the greatest supposable flood on record can increase the
elevation of the lake more than 92 to 92½ feet above sea-level, and
it will only be at long intervals of time when floods will raise that
elevation more than about 90 feet above sea-level. The control is
automatic and unfailingly certain. It prevents absolutely any damage
from the highest supposable floods of the Chagres, and reserves in
Lake Bohio all that is required for the purposes of the canal and
for wastage by evaporation through the lowest rainfall season. The
floods of the Chagres, therefore, instead of constituting the obstacle
to construction and convenient maintenance of the canal heretofore
supposed, are deprived of all their prejudicial effects and transformed
into beneficial agents for the operation of the waterway.

=379. Effect of Highest Floods on Current in Channel in Lake
Bohio.=—The highest floods are of short duration, and it can be stated
as a general law that the higher the flood the shorter its duration.
The great floods which it is necessary to consider in connection
with the maintenance and operation of this canal would last but a
comparatively few hours only. The great flood-flow of 140,000 cubic
feet per second would increase the current in the narrowest part of
the canal below Obispo to possibly 5 feet per second for a few hours
only, but that is the only inconvenience which would result from
such a flood discharge. That velocity could be reduced by additional
excavation.

=380. Alhajuela Reservoir not Needed at Opening of Canal.=—Inasmuch
as this system of control, devised and adopted by the Isthmian Canal
Commission, is completely effective in regulating the Chagres floods;
the reservoir proposed to be constructed by the new Panama Canal
Company at Alhajuela on the Chagres about 11 miles above Obispo is not
required, and the cost of its construction would be avoided. It could,
however, as a project be held in reserve. If the traffic of the canal
should increase to such an extent that more water would be needed for
feeding the summit level, the dam could be built at Alhajuela so as to
impound enough additional water to accommodate, with that stored in
Lake Bohio, at least five times the 10,000,000 annual traffic already
considered. Its existence would at the same time act with substantial
effect in controlling the Chagres floods and relieve the Gigante
spillway of a corresponding amount of duty.

=381. Locks on Panama Route.=—The locks on the Panama route are
designed to have the same dimensions as those in Nicaragua, as was
stated in the lecture on that route. The usable length is 740 feet
and the clear width 84 feet. They would be built chiefly of concrete
masonry, while the gates would be of steel and of the mitre type.

=382. The Bohio Locks.=—The great dam at Bohio raises the water
surface in the canal from sea-level in the Atlantic maritime section
to an ordinary maximum of 90 feet above sea-level; in other words,
the maximum ordinary total lift would be 90 feet. This total lift is
divided into two parts of 45 feet each. There is therefore a flight
of two locks at Bohio; indeed there are two flights side by side, as
the twin arrangement is designed to be used at all lock sites on both
routes. The typical dimensions and arrangements of these locks, with
the requisite culverts and other features, are shown in the plans and
sections between pages 396 and 397, Part V. They are not essentially
different from other great modern ship-canal locks. The excavation for
the Bohio locks is made in a rocky hill against which the southwesterly
end of the proposed Bohio dam rests, and they are less than 1000 feet
from it.

=383. The Pedro Miguel and Miraflores Locks.=—After leaving Bohio
Lake at Obispo a flight of two locks is found at Pedro Miguel, about
7.9 miles from the former or 21½ miles from Bohio. These locks have a
total ordinary maximum lift of 60 feet, divided into two lifts of 30
feet each. The fifth and last lock on the route is at Miraflores. The
average elevation of water between Pedro Miguel and Miraflores is 30
feet above mean sea-level. Inasmuch as the range of tide between high
and low in Panama Bay is about 20 feet, the maximum lift at Miraflores
is 40 feet and the minimum about 20. The twin locks at Miraflores bring
the canal surface down to the Pacific Ocean level, the distance from
those locks to the 6-fathom curve in Panama Bay being 8.54 miles. There
are therefore five locks on the Panama route, all arranged on the twin
plan, and, as on the Nicaragua route, all are founded on rock.

=384. Guard-gates near Obispo.=—Near Obispo a pair of guard-gates are
arranged “so that if it should become necessary to draw off the water
from the summit cut the level of Lake Bohio would not be affected.”

=385. Character and Stability of the Culebra Cut.=—An unprecedented
concentration of heavy cutting is found between Obispo and Pedro
Miguel. This is practically one cut, although the northwesterly end
toward Obispo is called the Emperador, while the deepest part at the
other end, about 3 miles from Pedro Miguel, is the great Culebra cut
with a maximum depth on the centre line of the canal of 286 ft. On page
93 of the Isthmian Canal Commission’s report is the following reference
to the material in this cut: “There is a little very hard rock at the
eastern end of this section, and the western 2 miles are in ordinary
materials. The remainder consists of a hard indurated clay, with some
softer material at the top and some strata and dikes of hard rock. In
fixing the price it has been rated as soft rock, but it must be given
slopes equivalent to those in earth. This cut has been estimated on
the basis of a bottom width of 150 feet, with side slopes of 1 on 1.”
When the old Panama Canal Company began its excavation in this cut
considerable difficulty was experienced by the slipping of the material
outside of the limits of the cut into the excavation, and the marks of
that action can be seen plainly at the present time. This experience
has given an impression that much of the material in this cut is
unstable, but that impression is erroneous. The clay which slipped
in the early days of the work was not drained, and like wet clay in
numerous places in this country it slipped down into the excavation.
This material is now drained and is perfectly stable. There is no
reason to anticipate any future difficulty if reasonable conditions
of drainage are maintained. The high faces of the cut will probably
weather to some extent, although experience with such clay faces on the
isthmus indicates that the amount of such action will be small. As a
matter of fact the material in which the Culebra cut is made is stable
and will give no sensible difficulty in maintenance.

[Illustration: The Culebra Cut.]

=386. Small Diversion-channels.=—Throughout the most of the distance
between Colon and Bohio on the easterly side of the canal the French
plan contemplated an excavated channel to receive a portion of the
waters of the Chagres as well as the flow of two smaller rivers,
the Gatuncillo and the Mindi, so as to conduct them into the Bay
of Manzanillo, immediately to the east of Colon. That so-called
diversion-channel was nearly completed. Under the plan of the
commission it would receive none of the Chagres flow, but it would be
available for intercepting the drainage of the high ground easterly
of the canal line and the flow of the two small rivers named, so that
these waters would not find their way into the canal. There are a few
other small works of similar character in different portions of the
line, all of which were recognized and provided for by the commission.

=387. Length and Curvature.=—The total length of the Panama route from
the 6-fathom curve at Colon to the same curve in Panama Bay is 49.09
miles. The general direction of the route in passing from Colon to
Panama is from northwest to southeast, the latter point being about
22 miles east of the Atlantic terminus. The depression through which
the line is laid is one of easy topography except at the continental
divide in the Culebra cut. As a consequence there is little heavy
work of excavation, as such matters go except in that cut. A further
consequence of such topography is a comparatively easy alignment, that
is, one in which the amount of curvature is not high. The smallest
radius of curvature is 3281 feet at the entrance to the inner harbor at
the Colon end of the route, and where the width is 800 feet. The radii
of the remaining curves range from 6234 feet to 19,629 feet.

The following table gives all the elements of curvature on the route
and indicates that it is not excessive:

    +-----------------+-------+-------+----------------+
    |Number of Curves.|Length.|Radius.|Total Curvature.|
    +-----------------+-------+-------+----------------+
    |                 | Miles | Feet. |      °   ′     |
    |        1        |  0.88 |19,629 |     14  17     |
    |        1        |   .48 |13,123 |     11  04     |
    |        4        |  4.22 |11,483 |    111  32     |
    |       15        | 11.61 | 9,842 |    355  50     |
    |        4        |  2.44 | 8,202 |     90  20     |
    |        2        |  1.67 | 6,562 |     77  00     |
    |        1        |   .73 | 6,234 |     35  45     |
    |        1        |   .82 | 3,281 |     75  51     |
    |                 +-------+-------+----------------+
    |                 | 22.85 |       |    771  39     |
    +-----------------+-------+-------+----------------+

=388. Principal Items of Work to be Performed.=—The principal items
of the total amount of work to be performed in completing the Panama
Canal, under the plan of the commission, can be classified as shown in
the following table:

    Dredging                     27,659,540 cu. yds.
    Dry earth                    14,386,954    ”
    Soft rock                    39,893,235    ”
    Hard rock                     8,806,340    ”
    Rock under water              4,891,667    ”
    Embankment and back-filling   1,802,753    ”
                                 ----------
      Total                      97,440,489    ”

    Concrete                      3,762,175 cu. yds.
    Granite                          13,820    ”
    Iron and steel               65,248,900 lbs.
    Excavation in coffer-dam          7,260 cu. yds.
    Pneumatic work                  108,410    ”

=389. Lengths of Sections and Elements of Total Cost.=—The lengths of
the various sections of this route and the costs of completing the work
upon them are fully set forth in the following table, taken from the
commission’s report, as were the two preceding:

TOTAL ESTIMATED COST.

    --------------------------------------------+---------+------------
                                                |  Miles. |    Cost.
    --------------------------------------------+---------+------------
    Colon entrance and harbor                   |   2.39  |  $8,057,707
    Harbor to Bohio locks, including levees     |  14.42  |  11,099,839
    Bohio locks, including excavation           |    .35  |  11,567,275
    Lake Bohio                                  |  13.61  |   2,952,154
    Obispo gates                                |         |     295,434
    Culebra section                             |   7.91  |  44,414,460
    Pedro Miguel locks, including excavation    |         |
           and dam                              |    .35  |   9,081,321
    Pedro Miguel level                          |   1.33  |   1,192,286
    Miraflores locks, including excavation      |         |
               and spillway                     |    .20  |   5,781,401
    Pacific level                               |   8.53  |  12,427,971
    Bohio dam                                   |         |   6,369,640
    Gigante spillway                            |         |   1,209,419
    Peña Blanca outlet                          |         |   2,448,076
    Chagres diversion                           |         |   1,929,982
    Gatun diversion                             |         |     100,000
    Panama Railroad diversion                   |         |   1,267,500
                                                +---------+------------
      Total                                     |  49.09  | 120,194,465
    Engineering, police, sanitation, and general|         |
      contingencies, 20 per cent.               |         |  24,038,893
                                                +---------+------------
      Aggregate                                 |         |$144,233,358
    --------------------------------------------+---------+------------

The item in this table called Panama Railroad diversion affords
provision for the reconstruction of the railroad necessitated by the
formation of Lake Bohio. That lake would submerge the present location
of the railroad for 14 or 15 miles.

[Illustration: The Culebra Cut with Steamer Deutschland in it.]

=390. The Twenty Per Cent Allowances for Exigencies.=—It will
be observed that in the estimates of cost of the canal on both
the Nicaragua and the Panama routes, 20 per cent is allowed for
“engineering, police, sanitation, and general contingencies.” For the
purposes of comparison the same percentage to cover these items was
used on both routes. As a matter of fact the large amount of work
which has already been performed on the Panama route removes many
uncertainties as to the character of material and other features of
difficulty which would be disclosed only after the beginning of the
work in Nicaragua. It has therefore been contended with considerable
basis of reason that a less percentage to cover these uncertainties
should be employed in connection with the Panama estimates than in
connection with those for the Nicaragua route. Indeed it might be
maintained that the exigencies which increase cost should be made
proportional to the length of route and the untried features. On the
other hand, both Panama and Colon are comparatively large centres
of population, and, furthermore, there is a considerable population
stretched along the line of the Panama Railroad between those points.
The climate and the unsanitary condition of practically every centre
of population in Central America and on the isthmus contribute to the
continual presence of tropical fevers, and other diseases contingent
upon the existing conditions of life. It is probable, among other
things, that yellow fever is always present on the isthmus. Inasmuch as
the Nicaragua route is practically without population, the amount of
disease existing along it is exceedingly small, there being practically
no people to be sick. The initial expenditure for the sanitation of
the cities at the extremities of the Panama route, as well as for
the country between, would be far greater for that route than on the
Nicaragua. This fact compensates, to a substantial extent at least,
for the physical uncertainties on the Nicaragua line. Indeed a careful
examination of all the conditions existing on both routes indicates the
reasonableness of applying the same 20 per cent to both total estimates
of cost.

=391. Value of Plant, Property, and Rights on the Isthmus.=—The
preceding estimated cost of $144,233,358 for completing the Panama
Canal must be increased by the amount necessary to be paid for all the
property and rights of the new Panama Canal Company on the isthmus. A
large amount of excavation has been performed, amounting to 77,000,000
cubic yards of all classes of materials, and nearly all the right of
way has been purchased. The new Panama Canal Company furnished the
commission with a detailed inventory of its entire properties, which
the latter classified as follows:

     1. Lands not built on.
     2. Buildings, 2431 in number, divided among 47
        subclassifications.
     3. Furniture and stable outfit, with 17 subclassifications.
     4. Floating plant and spare parts, with 24
        subclassifications.
     5. Rolling plant and spare parts, with 17 subclassifications.
     6. Plant, stationary and semi-stationary, and spare parts,
        with 25 subclassifications.
     7. Small material and spare parts, with 4 subclassifications.
     8. Surgical and medical outfit.
     9. Medical stores.
    10. Office supplies, stationery.
    11. Miscellaneous supplies, with 740 subclassifications.

The commission did not estimate any value for the vast amount of plant
along the line of the canal, as its condition in relation to actual use
is uncertain, and the most of it would not be available for efficient
and economical execution of the work by modern American methods.
Again, a considerable amount of excavated material along some portions
of the line has been deposited in spoil-banks immediately adjacent to
the excavation from which it was taken, and would have to be rehandled
in forming the increased size of prism contemplated in the commission’s
plan.

In view of all the conditions affecting it, the commission made the
following estimate of the value of the property of the new Panama Canal
Company, as it is now found on the Panama route:

    Canal excavation              $21,020,386
    Chagres diversion                 178,186
    Gatun diversion                 1,396,456
    Railroad diversion (4 miles)      300,000
                                  -----------
                                   22,895,028
    Contingencies, 20 per cent      4,579,005
                                  -----------
        Aggregate                  27,474,033
    Panama Railroad stock at par    6,850,000
    Maps, drawings, and records     2,000,000
                                  -----------
                                  $36,324,033

The commission added 10 per cent to this total “to cover omissions,
making the total valuation of the” property and rights as now existing,
$40,000,000.

In computing the value of the channel excavation in the above
tabulation it was estimated that “the total quantity of excavation
which will be of value in the new plan is 39,586,332 cubic yards.”

=392. Offer of New Panama Canal Company to Sell for $40,000,000.=—In
January, 1902, the new Panama Canal Company offered to sell and
transfer to the United States Government all its property and rights on
the isthmus of every description for the estimate of the commission,
viz., $40,000,000. In order to make a proper comparison between the
total costs of constructing the canal on the two routes it is necessary
to add this $40,000,000 to the preceding aggregate of $144,233,358,
making the total cost of the Panama Canal $184,233,358. It will be
remembered that the corresponding total cost of the Nicaragua Canal
would be $189,864,062.

[Illustration: The Railroad Pier at La Boca, the Panama end of the
Canal.]

=393. Annual Costs of Operation and Maintenance.=—It is obvious that
the cost of operating and maintaining a ship-canal across the American
isthmus would be an annual charge of large amount. A large organized
force would be requisite, and no small amount of material and work
of various kinds and grades would be needed to maintain the works in
suitable condition. The commission made very careful and thorough
studies to ascertain as nearly as practicable what these comparative
costs would be. In doing this it gave careful consideration to the
annual expenditures made in maintaining the various ship-canals of
the world, including the Suez, Manchester, Kiel, and St. Mary’s Falls
canals. The conclusion reached was that the estimated annual costs of
maintenance and operation could reasonably be taken as follows:

    For the Nicaragua Canal            $3,300,000
    For the Panama Canal                2,000,000
                                       ----------
        Difference in favor of Panama  $1,300,000

=394. Volcanoes and Earthquakes.=—Much has been written regarding the
comparative liability to damage of canal works along these two routes
by volcanic or seismic agencies. As is well known, the entire Central
American isthmus is a volcanic region, and in the past a considerable
number of destructive volcanic eruptions have taken place at a number
of points. There is a line of live volcanoes extending southeasterly
through Nicaragua and Costa Rica. Many earthquake shocks have occurred
throughout Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and the State of Panama, some
of which have done more or less damage in large portions of those
districts. At the same time many buildings which have been injured have
not been substantially built. In fact that has generally been the case.
Both routes lie in districts that are doubtless subject to earthquake
shocks, but there is little probability that the substantial structures
of a canal along either line would be essentially injured by them. The
conclusions of the commission as to this feature of the matter are
concisely stated in three paragraphs at the top of page 170 of its
report:

“It is possible and even probable that the more accurately fitting
portions of the canal, such as the lock-gates, may at times be
distorted by earthquakes, and some inconvenience may result therefrom.
That contingency may be classed with the accidental collision of ships
with the gates, and is to be provided for in the same way, by duplicate
gates.

“It is possible also that a fissure might open which would drain the
canal, and, if it remained open, might destroy it. This possibility
should not be erected by the fancy into a threatening danger. If
a timorous imagination is to be the guide, no great work can be
undertaken anywhere. This risk may be classed with that of a great
conflagration in a city like that of Chicago in 1871, or Boston in 1872.

“It is the opinion of the commission that such danger as exists from
earthquakes is essentially the same for both the Nicaragua and Panama
routes, and that in neither case is it sufficient to prevent the
construction of the canal.”

The Nicaragua route crosses the line of live volcanoes running from
northwest to southeast through Central America, and the crater of
Ometepe in Lake Nicaragua is about 11 miles only from the line. The
eruptions of Pelée and Soufriere show that such proximity of possible
volcanic action may be a source of great danger, although even the
destruction by them does not certainly indicate damage either to
navigation or to canal structures at the distance of 11 miles. Whatever
volcanic danger may exist lies on the Nicaragua route, for there is no
volcano nearer than 175 miles to the Panama route.

=395. Hygienic Conditions on the Two Routes.=—The relative
healthfulness of the two routes has already been touched upon. There
is undoubtedly at the present time a vast amount of unhealthfulness
on the Panama route, and practically none on the Nicaragua route, but
this is accounted for when it is remembered, as has also been stated,
that there is practically no population on the Nicaragua route and
a comparatively large population along the Panama line. There is a
wide-spread, popular impression that the Central American countries
are necessarily intensely unhealthful. This is an error, in spite of
the facts that the construction of the Panama Railroad was attended
with an appalling amount of sickness and loss of life, and that records
of many epidemics at other times and in other places exist in nearly
all of these countries. There are the best of good reasons to believe
that with the enforcement of sanitary regulations, which are now well
understood and completely available, the Central American countries
would be as healthful as our Southern States. A proper recognition of
hygienic conditions of life suitable to a tropical climate would work
wonders in Central America in reducing the death-rate. At the present
time the domestic administration of most of the cities and towns of
Nicaragua and Panama, as well as the generality of Central American
cities, is characterized by the absence of practically everything which
makes for public health, and by the presence of nearly every agency
working for the diseases which flourish in tropical climates. When
the United States Government reaches the point of actual construction
of an isthmian canal the sanitary features of that work should be
administered and enforced in every detail with the rigor of the
most exacting military discipline. Under such conditions, epidemics
could either be avoided or reduced to manageable dimensions, but
not otherwise. The commission concluded that “Existing conditions
indicate hygienic advantages for the Nicaragua route, although it is
probable that no less effective sanitary measures must be taken during
construction in the one case than in the other.”

=396. Time of Passage through the Canal.=—The time required for
passing through a transisthmian canal is affected by the length, by
the number of locks, by the number of curves, and by the sharpness
of curvature. The speed of a ship, and consequently the time of
passage, is also affected by the depth of water under its keel. It
is well known that the same power applied to a ship in deep water
of unlimited width will produce a much higher rate of movement than
the same power applied to the same ship in a restricted waterway,
especially when the draft of the ship is but little less than the
depth of water. These considerations have important bearings both upon
the dimensions of a ship-canal and upon the time required to pass
through it. They were most carefully considered by the commission, as
were also such other matters as the delay incurred in passing through
the locks on each line, the latter including the delay of slowing or
approaching the lock and of increasing speed after passing it, the
time of opening and closing the gates, and the time of emptying and
filling the locks. It is also evident that ships of various sizes will
require different times for their passage. After giving due weight
to all these considerations it was found that what may be called an
average ship would require twelve hours for passing through the Panama
Canal and thirty-three hours for passing through the Nicaragua Canal.
Approximately speaking, therefore, it may be stated that an average
passage through the former waterway will require but one third the time
needed for the latter.

[Illustration: A Street in Panama.]

=397. Time for Completion on the Two Routes.=—The time in which an
isthmian canal may be completed and ready for traffic is an element of
the problem of much importance. There are two features of the work to
be done at Panama, each of which is of sufficient magnitude to affect
to a controlling extent the time required for the construction of the
canal, viz., the Bohio dam and the Culebra cut. Both of these portions
of the work may, however, be prosecuted concurrently and with entire
independence of each other. There are no such features on the Nicaragua
route, although the cut through the divide west of the lake is probably
the largest single work on that route. In considering this feature of
the matter it is well to observe that the total amount of excavation
and embankment of all grades on the Nicaragua route is practically
228,000,000 cubic yards, while that remaining to be done on the Panama
route is but little more than 97,000,000 cubic yards, or 43 per cent
of the former. The accompanying figures show the relative quantities of
total excavation, concrete, iron, and steel required in construction
along the two routes, as well also as the total amounts and radii of
curvature.

[Illustration: Diagrams comparing some of the main Elements of the two
Routes.]

The commission has estimated ten years for the completion of the
canal on the Panama route and eight years for the Nicaragua route,
including in both cases the time required for preparation and that
consumed by unforeseen delays. The writer believes that the actual
circumstances attending work on the two routes would justify an
exchange of these time relations. There is great concentration of
work in the Culebra-Emperador cut on the Panama route, covering about
45 per cent of the total excavation of all grades (43,000,000 cubic
yards), which is distributed over a distance of about 7 miles, with
the location of greatest intensity at Culebra. This demands efficient
organization and special plant so administered as to reduce the
working force to an absolute minimum by the employment of machinery
to the greatest possible extent. A judicious, effective organization
and plant would transform the execution of this work into what may be
called a manufactory of excavation with all the intensity of direction
and efficiency of well designed and administered machinery which
characterizes the concentration of labor and mechanical appliances in
great manufacturing establishments. Such a successful installation
would involve scarcely more advance in contract operations than was
exhibited, in its day, in the execution of the work on the Chicago
Drainage-canal. By such means only can the peculiar difficulties
attendant upon the execution of great works in the tropics be reduced
to controllable dimensions. The same general observations may be
applied to the construction of the Bohio dam, even should a no more
favorable site be found.

The greatest concentration of excavation on the Nicaragua route is
between the lake and the Pacific, but it constitutes only 10 per cent
of the total excavation of all grades, and it can be completed in far
less time than the great cut on the Panama route. If this were the
only great feature of work besides the dam, the time for completion
of work on this route would be materially less than that required for
the Panama crossing. As a matter of fact, there are a succession of
features of equivalent magnitude, or very nearly so, from Greytown
nearly to Brito, extending over a distance of at least 175 miles,
requiring the construction of a substantial service railroad over a
considerable portion of the distance prior to the beginning of work.
This attenuation of work requires the larger features to be executed in
succession to a considerable extent, or much duplication of plant and
the employment of a great force of laborers, practically all of whom
must be foreigners, housed, organized, and maintained in a practically
uninhabited tropical country where many serious difficulties reach a
maximum. It is not within the experience of civil engineers to execute
by any practicable means that kind of a programme on schedule time.
The weight of this observation is much increased when it is remembered
that the total volume of work may be taken nearly twice as great in
Nicaragua as at Panama, and that large portions between Lake Nicaragua
and the Caribbean Sea must be executed in a region of continual and
enormous rainfall. It would seem more reasonable to the writer to
estimate eight years for the completion of the Panama Canal and ten
years for the completion of the Nicaragua Canal.


=398. Industrial and Commercial Value of the Canal.=—The prospective
industrial and commercial value of the canal also occupied the
attention of the commission in a broad and careful study of the
elements which enter that part of the problem. It is difficult if not
impossible to predict just what the effect of a transisthmian canal
would be either upon the ocean commerce of the United States or of
other parts of the world, but it seems reasonable to suppose from the
result of the commission’s examinations that had the canal been in
existence in 1899 at least 5,000,000 tons of the actual traffic of
that year would have been accommodated by it. The opening of such a
waterway, like the opening of all other traffic routes, induces the
creation of new traffic to an extent that cannot be estimated, but it
would appear to be reasonable to suppose that within ten years from the
date of its opening the vessel tonnage using it would not be less than
10,000,000 tons.

[Illustration: View of Panama.]

The Nicaragua route would favor in distance the traffic between our
Atlantic (including Gulf) and Pacific ports. The distances between
our Atlantic ports and San Francisco would be about 378 nautical
miles less than by Panama. Between New Orleans and San Francisco
this difference in favor of the route by Greytown and Brito would be
580 nautical miles. It must be remembered, however, that the greater
time by at least twenty-four hours required for passage through the
Nicaragua Canal practically obliterates this advantage, and in some
cases would throw the advantage in favor of the Panama waterway. This
last observation would hold with particular force if for any reason
a vessel should not continue her passage, or should continue it at a
reduced speed during hours of darkness, which could not be escaped on
the Nicaragua Canal, but might be avoided at Panama. For all traffic
between the Atlantic (including Gulf) ports and the west coast of
South America the Panama crossing would be the most advantageous. As a
matter of fact, while there may be some small advantage in miles by one
route or the other for the traffic between some particular points, on
the whole neither route would have any very great advantage over the
other in point of distance or time; either would serve efficiently the
purposes of all ocean traffic in which the ports of the United States
are directly interested.

The effect of this ship waterway upon the well-being of the United
States is not altogether of a commercial character. As indicated by
the commission, this additional bond between the two portions of the
country will have a beneficial effect upon the unity of the political
interests as well as upon the commercial welfare of the country. Indeed
it is the judgment of many well-informed people that the commercial
advantages resulting from a closer touch between the Atlantic and
Pacific coasts of the country are of less consequence than the unifying
of political interests.

In a final comparison between the two routes it is to be remembered
that the concession under which the new Panama Company has been and
is now prosecuting its work is practically valueless for the purposes
of this country. It will therefore be necessary to secure from the
republic of Colombia, for the Panama route, as well as from the
republics of Nicaragua and Costa Rica, for the Nicaragua route, such
new concessions as may be adequate for all the purposes of the United
States in the construction of this transisthmian canal. The cost of
those concessions in either case must be added to the estimated total
cost of the work, as set forth, in order to reach the total cost of the
canal along either route.


=399. Comparison of Routes.=—Concisely stating the situation, its main
features may be expressed somewhat as follows:

Both routes are entirely “practicable and feasible.”

Neither route has any material commercial advantage over the other as
to time, although the distance between our Atlantic (including Gulf)
and Pacific ports is less by the Nicaragua route.

The Panama route has about one fourth the length of that in Nicaragua;
it has less locks, less elevation of summit level, and far less
curvature, all contributing to correspondingly decreased risks peculiar
to the passage through a canal. The estimated annual cost of operation
and maintenance of the Panama route is but six tenths that for the
Nicaragua route.

The harbor features may be made adequate for all the needs of a canal
by either route, with such little preponderance of advantage as may
exist in favor of the Panama crossing.

The commission estimated ten years for the completion of the Panama
Canal and eight years for the Nicaragua waterway, but the writer
believes that these relations should be exchanged, or at least that the
time of completion for the Panama route should not be estimated greater
than for the Nicaragua.

The water-supply is practically unlimited on both routes, but the
controlling or regulating works, being automatic, are much simpler and
more easily operated and maintained on the Panama route.

The Nicaragua route is practically uninhabited, and consequently
practically no sickness exists there. On the Panama route, on the
contrary, there is a considerable population extending along the entire
line, among which yellow fever and other tropical diseases are probably
always found. Initial sanitary works of much larger magnitude would be
required on the Panama route than on the Nicaragua, although probably
as rigorous sanitary measures would be required during the construction
of the canal on one route as on the other.

The railroad on the Panama route and other facilities offered by a
considerable existing population render the beginning of work and the
housing and organization of the requisite labor force less difficult
and more prompt than on the Nicaragua route.

The greater amount of work on the Nicaragua route, and its distribution
over a far greater length of line, involve the employment of a
correspondingly greater force of laborers, with greater attendant
difficulties, for an equally prompt completion of the work.

The relative seismic conditions of the two routes cannot be
quantitatively stated with accuracy, but in neither case are they of
sufficient gravity to cause anxiety as to the effects upon completed
canal structures.

Concessions and treaties require to be secured and negotiated for the
construction of the canal on either route, and under the conditions
created by the $40,000,000 offer of the new Panama Canal Company
this feature of both routes appears to possess about the same
characteristics, although the Nicaragua route is, perhaps, freer from
the complicating shadows of prior rights and concessions.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75910 ***
﻿
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Complete
by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use
it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

Title: Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Complete

Author: Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

Release Date: August 20, 2006 [EBook #76]
Last Updated: February 23, 2018
Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HUCKLEBERRY FINN ***

Produced by David Widger





ADVENTURES

OF

HUCKLEBERRY FINN

(Tom Sawyer's Comrade)

By Mark Twain

Complete




CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I. Civilizing Huck.--Miss Watson.--Tom Sawyer Waits.

CHAPTER II. The Boys Escape Jim.--Torn Sawyer's Gang.--Deep-laid Plans.

CHAPTER III. A Good Going-over.--Grace Triumphant.--“One of Tom Sawyers's
Lies”.

CHAPTER IV. Huck and the Judge.--Superstition.

CHAPTER V. Huck's Father.--The Fond Parent.--Reform.

CHAPTER VI. He Went for Judge Thatcher.--Huck Decided to Leave.--Political
Economy.--Thrashing Around.

CHAPTER VII. Laying for Him.--Locked in the Cabin.--Sinking the
Body.--Resting.

CHAPTER VIII. Sleeping in the Woods.--Raising the Dead.--Exploring the
Island.--Finding Jim.--Jim's Escape.--Signs.--Balum.

CHAPTER IX. The Cave.--The Floating House.

CHAPTER X. The Find.--Old Hank Bunker.--In Disguise.

CHAPTER XI. Huck and the Woman.--The Search.--Prevarication.--Going to
Goshen.

CHAPTER XII. Slow Navigation.--Borrowing Things.--Boarding the Wreck.--The
Plotters.--Hunting for the Boat.

CHAPTER XIII. Escaping from the Wreck.--The Watchman.--Sinking.

CHAPTER XIV. A General Good Time.--The Harem.--French.

CHAPTER XV. Huck Loses the Raft.--In the Fog.--Huck Finds the Raft.--Trash.

CHAPTER XVI. Expectation.--A White Lie.--Floating Currency.--Running by
Cairo.--Swimming Ashore.

CHAPTER XVII. An Evening Call.--The Farm in Arkansaw.--Interior
Decorations.--Stephen Dowling Bots.--Poetical Effusions.

CHAPTER XVIII. Col. Grangerford.--Aristocracy.--Feuds.--The
Testament.--Recovering the Raft.--The Wood--pile.--Pork and Cabbage.

CHAPTER XIX. Tying Up Day--times.--An Astronomical Theory.--Running a
Temperance Revival.--The Duke of Bridgewater.--The Troubles of Royalty.

CHAPTER XX. Huck Explains.--Laying Out a Campaign.--Working the
Camp--meeting.--A Pirate at the Camp--meeting.--The Duke as a Printer.

CHAPTER XXI. Sword Exercise.--Hamlet's Soliloquy.--They Loafed Around
Town.--A Lazy Town.--Old Boggs.--Dead.

CHAPTER XXII. Sherburn.--Attending the Circus.--Intoxication in the
Ring.--The Thrilling Tragedy.

CHAPTER XXIII. Sold.--Royal Comparisons.--Jim Gets Home-sick.

CHAPTER XXIV. Jim in Royal Robes.--They Take a Passenger.--Getting
Information.--Family Grief.

CHAPTER XXV. Is It Them?--Singing the “Doxologer.”--Awful Square--Funeral
Orgies.--A Bad Investment .

CHAPTER XXVI. A Pious King.--The King's Clergy.--She Asked His
Pardon.--Hiding in the Room.--Huck Takes the Money.

CHAPTER XXVII. The Funeral.--Satisfying Curiosity.--Suspicious of
Huck,--Quick Sales and Small.

CHAPTER XXVIII. The Trip to England.--“The Brute!”--Mary Jane Decides to
Leave.--Huck Parting with Mary Jane.--Mumps.--The Opposition Line.

CHAPTER XXIX. Contested Relationship.--The King Explains the Loss.--A
Question of Handwriting.--Digging up the Corpse.--Huck Escapes.

CHAPTER XXX. The King Went for Him.--A Royal Row.--Powerful Mellow.

CHAPTER XXXI. Ominous Plans.--News from Jim.--Old Recollections.--A Sheep
Story.--Valuable Information.

CHAPTER XXXII. Still and Sunday--like.--Mistaken Identity.--Up a Stump.--In
a Dilemma.

CHAPTER XXXIII. A Nigger Stealer.--Southern Hospitality.--A Pretty Long
Blessing.--Tar and Feathers.

CHAPTER XXXIV. The Hut by the Ash Hopper.--Outrageous.--Climbing the
Lightning Rod.--Troubled with Witches.

CHAPTER XXXV. Escaping Properly.--Dark Schemes.--Discrimination in
Stealing.--A Deep Hole.

CHAPTER XXXVI. The Lightning Rod.--His Level Best.--A Bequest to
Posterity.--A High Figure.

CHAPTER XXXVII. The Last Shirt.--Mooning Around.--Sailing Orders.--The
Witch Pie.

CHAPTER XXXVIII. The Coat of Arms.--A Skilled Superintendent.--Unpleasant
Glory.--A Tearful Subject.

CHAPTER XXXIX. Rats.--Lively Bed--fellows.--The Straw Dummy.

CHAPTER XL. Fishing.--The Vigilance Committee.--A Lively Run.--Jim Advises
a Doctor.

CHAPTER XLI. The Doctor.--Uncle Silas.--Sister Hotchkiss.--Aunt Sally in
Trouble.

CHAPTER XLII. Tom Sawyer Wounded.--The Doctor's Story.--Tom
Confesses.--Aunt Polly Arrives.--Hand Out Them Letters    .

CHAPTER THE LAST. Out of Bondage.--Paying the Captive.--Yours Truly, Huck
Finn.




ILLUSTRATIONS.


The Widows

Moses and the “Bulrushers”

Miss Watson

Huck Stealing Away

They Tip-toed Along

Jim

Tom Sawyer's Band of Robbers  

Huck Creeps into his Window

Miss Watson's Lecture

The Robbers Dispersed

Rubbing the Lamp

! ! ! !

Judge Thatcher surprised

Jim Listening

“Pap”

Huck and his Father

Reforming the Drunkard

Falling from Grace

Getting out of the Way

Solid Comfort

Thinking it Over

Raising a Howl

“Git Up”

The Shanty

Shooting the Pig

Taking a Rest

In the Woods

Watching the Boat

Discovering the Camp Fire

Jim and the Ghost

Misto Bradish's Nigger

Exploring the Cave

In the Cave

Jim sees a Dead Man

They Found Eight Dollars

Jim and the Snake

Old Hank Bunker

“A Fair Fit”

“Come In”

“Him and another Man”

She puts up a Snack

“Hump Yourself”

On the Raft

He sometimes Lifted a Chicken

“Please don't, Bill”

“It ain't Good Morals”

“Oh! Lordy, Lordy!”

In a Fix

“Hello, What's Up?”

The Wreck

We turned in and Slept

Turning over the Truck

Solomon and his Million Wives

The story of “Sollermun”

“We Would Sell the Raft”

Among the Snags

Asleep on the Raft

“Something being Raftsman”

“Boy, that's a Lie”

“Here I is, Huck”

Climbing up the Bank

“Who's There?”

“Buck”

“It made Her look Spidery”

“They got him out and emptied Him”  

The House

Col. Grangerford

Young Harney Shepherdson

Miss Charlotte

“And asked me if I Liked Her”

“Behind the Wood-pile”

Hiding Day-times

“And Dogs a-Coming”

“By rights I am a Duke!”

“I am the Late Dauphin”

Tail Piece

On the Raft

The King as Juliet

“Courting on the Sly”

“A Pirate for Thirty Years”

Another little Job

Practizing

Hamlet's Soliloquy

“Gimme a Chaw”

A Little Monthly Drunk

The Death of Boggs

Sherburn steps out

A Dead Head

He shed Seventeen Suits

Tragedy

Their Pockets Bulged

Henry the Eighth in Boston Harbor

Harmless

Adolphus

He fairly emptied that Young Fellow

“Alas, our Poor Brother”

“You Bet it is”

Leaking

Making up the “Deffisit”

Going for him

The Doctor

The Bag of Money

The Cubby

Supper with the Hare-Lip

Honest Injun

The Duke looks under the Bed

Huck takes the Money

A Crack in the Dining-room Door

The Undertaker

“He had a Rat!”

“Was you in my Room?”

Jawing

In Trouble

Indignation

How to Find Them

He Wrote

Hannah with the Mumps

The Auction

The True Brothers

The Doctor leads Huck

The Duke Wrote

“Gentlemen, Gentlemen!”

“Jim Lit Out”

The King shakes Huck

The Duke went for Him

Spanish Moss

“Who Nailed Him?”

Thinking

He gave him Ten Cents

Striking for the Back Country

Still and Sunday-like

She hugged him tight

“Who do you reckon it is?”

“It was Tom Sawyer”

“Mr. Archibald Nichols, I presume?”

A pretty long Blessing

Traveling By Rail

Vittles

A Simple Job

Witches

Getting Wood

One of the Best Authorities

The Breakfast-Horn

Smouching the Knives

Going down the Lightning-Rod

Stealing spoons

Tom advises a Witch Pie

The Rubbage-Pile

“Missus, dey's a Sheet Gone”

In a Tearing Way

One of his Ancestors

Jim's Coat of Arms

A Tough Job

Buttons on their Tails

Irrigation

Keeping off Dull Times

Sawdust Diet

Trouble is Brewing

Fishing

Every one had a Gun

Tom caught on a Splinter

Jim advises a Doctor

The Doctor

Uncle Silas in Danger

Old Mrs. Hotchkiss

Aunt Sally talks to Huck

Tom Sawyer wounded

The Doctor speaks for Jim

Tom rose square up in Bed

“Hand out them Letters”

Out of Bondage

Tom's Liberality

Yours Truly




EXPLANATORY

IN this book a number of dialects are used, to wit:  the Missouri negro
dialect; the extremest form of the backwoods Southwestern dialect; the
ordinary “Pike County” dialect; and four modified varieties of this
last. The shadings have not been done in a haphazard fashion, or by
guesswork; but painstakingly, and with the trustworthy guidance and
support of personal familiarity with these several forms of speech.

I make this explanation for the reason that without it many readers
would suppose that all these characters were trying to talk alike and
not succeeding.

THE AUTHOR.




HUCKLEBERRY FINN

Scene:  The Mississippi Valley Time:  Forty to fifty years ago




CHAPTER I.

YOU don't know about me without you have read a book by the name of The
Adventures of Tom Sawyer; but that ain't no matter.  That book was made
by Mr. Mark Twain, and he told the truth, mainly.  There was things
which he stretched, but mainly he told the truth.  That is nothing.  I
never seen anybody but lied one time or another, without it was Aunt
Polly, or the widow, or maybe Mary.  Aunt Polly--Tom's Aunt Polly, she
is--and Mary, and the Widow Douglas is all told about in that book, which
is mostly a true book, with some stretchers, as I said before.

Now the way that the book winds up is this:  Tom and me found the money
that the robbers hid in the cave, and it made us rich.  We got six
thousand dollars apiece--all gold.  It was an awful sight of money when
it was piled up.  Well, Judge Thatcher he took it and put it out
at interest, and it fetched us a dollar a day apiece all the year
round--more than a body could tell what to do with.  The Widow Douglas
she took me for her son, and allowed she would sivilize me; but it was
rough living in the house all the time, considering how dismal regular
and decent the widow was in all her ways; and so when I couldn't stand
it no longer I lit out.  I got into my old rags and my sugar-hogshead
again, and was free and satisfied.  But Tom Sawyer he hunted me up and
said he was going to start a band of robbers, and I might join if I
would go back to the widow and be respectable.  So I went back.

The widow she cried over me, and called me a poor lost lamb, and she
called me a lot of other names, too, but she never meant no harm by
it. She put me in them new clothes again, and I couldn't do nothing but
sweat and sweat, and feel all cramped up.  Well, then, the old thing
commenced again.  The widow rung a bell for supper, and you had to come
to time. When you got to the table you couldn't go right to eating, but
you had to wait for the widow to tuck down her head and grumble a little
over the victuals, though there warn't really anything the matter with
them,--that is, nothing only everything was cooked by itself.  In a
barrel of odds and ends it is different; things get mixed up, and the
juice kind of swaps around, and the things go better.

After supper she got out her book and learned me about Moses and the
Bulrushers, and I was in a sweat to find out all about him; but by and
by she let it out that Moses had been dead a considerable long time; so
then I didn't care no more about him, because I don't take no stock in
dead people.

Pretty soon I wanted to smoke, and asked the widow to let me.  But she
wouldn't.  She said it was a mean practice and wasn't clean, and I must
try to not do it any more.  That is just the way with some people.  They
get down on a thing when they don't know nothing about it.  Here she was
a-bothering about Moses, which was no kin to her, and no use to anybody,
being gone, you see, yet finding a power of fault with me for doing a
thing that had some good in it.  And she took snuff, too; of course that
was all right, because she done it herself.

Her sister, Miss Watson, a tolerable slim old maid, with goggles on,
had just come to live with her, and took a set at me now with a
spelling-book. She worked me middling hard for about an hour, and then
the widow made her ease up.  I couldn't stood it much longer.  Then for
an hour it was deadly dull, and I was fidgety.  Miss Watson would say,
“Don't put your feet up there, Huckleberry;” and “Don't scrunch up
like that, Huckleberry--set up straight;” and pretty soon she would
say, “Don't gap and stretch like that, Huckleberry--why don't you try to
behave?”  Then she told me all about the bad place, and I said I wished
I was there. She got mad then, but I didn't mean no harm.  All I wanted
was to go somewheres; all I wanted was a change, I warn't particular.
 She said it was wicked to say what I said; said she wouldn't say it for
the whole world; she was going to live so as to go to the good place.
 Well, I couldn't see no advantage in going where she was going, so I
made up my mind I wouldn't try for it.  But I never said so, because it
would only make trouble, and wouldn't do no good.

Now she had got a start, and she went on and told me all about the good
place.  She said all a body would have to do there was to go around all
day long with a harp and sing, forever and ever.  So I didn't think
much of it. But I never said so.  I asked her if she reckoned Tom Sawyer
would go there, and she said not by a considerable sight.  I was glad
about that, because I wanted him and me to be together.

Miss Watson she kept pecking at me, and it got tiresome and lonesome.
 By and by they fetched the niggers in and had prayers, and then
everybody was off to bed.  I went up to my room with a piece of candle,
and put it on the table.  Then I set down in a chair by the window and
tried to think of something cheerful, but it warn't no use.  I felt
so lonesome I most wished I was dead.  The stars were shining, and the
leaves rustled in the woods ever so mournful; and I heard an owl, away
off, who-whooing about somebody that was dead, and a whippowill and a
dog crying about somebody that was going to die; and the wind was trying
to whisper something to me, and I couldn't make out what it was, and so
it made the cold shivers run over me. Then away out in the woods I heard
that kind of a sound that a ghost makes when it wants to tell about
something that's on its mind and can't make itself understood, and so
can't rest easy in its grave, and has to go about that way every night
grieving.  I got so down-hearted and scared I did wish I had some
company.  Pretty soon a spider went crawling up my shoulder, and I
flipped it off and it lit in the candle; and before I could budge it
was all shriveled up.  I didn't need anybody to tell me that that was
an awful bad sign and would fetch me some bad luck, so I was scared
and most shook the clothes off of me. I got up and turned around in my
tracks three times and crossed my breast every time; and then I tied
up a little lock of my hair with a thread to keep witches away.  But
I hadn't no confidence.  You do that when you've lost a horseshoe that
you've found, instead of nailing it up over the door, but I hadn't ever
heard anybody say it was any way to keep off bad luck when you'd killed
a spider.

I set down again, a-shaking all over, and got out my pipe for a smoke;
for the house was all as still as death now, and so the widow wouldn't
know. Well, after a long time I heard the clock away off in the town
go boom--boom--boom--twelve licks; and all still again--stiller than
ever. Pretty soon I heard a twig snap down in the dark amongst the
trees--something was a stirring.  I set still and listened.  Directly I
could just barely hear a “me-yow! me-yow!” down there.  That was good!
 Says I, “me-yow! me-yow!” as soft as I could, and then I put out the
light and scrambled out of the window on to the shed.  Then I slipped
down to the ground and crawled in among the trees, and, sure enough,
there was Tom Sawyer waiting for me.




CHAPTER II.

WE went tiptoeing along a path amongst the trees back towards the end of
the widow's garden, stooping down so as the branches wouldn't scrape our
heads. When we was passing by the kitchen I fell over a root and made
a noise.  We scrouched down and laid still.  Miss Watson's big nigger,
named Jim, was setting in the kitchen door; we could see him pretty
clear, because there was a light behind him.  He got up and stretched
his neck out about a minute, listening.  Then he says:

“Who dah?”

He listened some more; then he come tiptoeing down and stood right
between us; we could a touched him, nearly.  Well, likely it was
minutes and minutes that there warn't a sound, and we all there so close
together.  There was a place on my ankle that got to itching, but I
dasn't scratch it; and then my ear begun to itch; and next my back,
right between my shoulders.  Seemed like I'd die if I couldn't scratch.
 Well, I've noticed that thing plenty times since.  If you are with
the quality, or at a funeral, or trying to go to sleep when you ain't
sleepy--if you are anywheres where it won't do for you to scratch, why
you will itch all over in upwards of a thousand places. Pretty soon Jim
says:

“Say, who is you?  Whar is you?  Dog my cats ef I didn' hear sumf'n.
Well, I know what I's gwyne to do:  I's gwyne to set down here and
listen tell I hears it agin.”

So he set down on the ground betwixt me and Tom.  He leaned his back up
against a tree, and stretched his legs out till one of them most touched
one of mine.  My nose begun to itch.  It itched till the tears come into
my eyes.  But I dasn't scratch.  Then it begun to itch on the inside.
Next I got to itching underneath.  I didn't know how I was going to set
still. This miserableness went on as much as six or seven minutes; but
it seemed a sight longer than that.  I was itching in eleven different
places now.  I reckoned I couldn't stand it more'n a minute longer,
but I set my teeth hard and got ready to try.  Just then Jim begun
to breathe heavy; next he begun to snore--and then I was pretty soon
comfortable again.

Tom he made a sign to me--kind of a little noise with his mouth--and we
went creeping away on our hands and knees.  When we was ten foot off Tom
whispered to me, and wanted to tie Jim to the tree for fun.  But I said
no; he might wake and make a disturbance, and then they'd find out I
warn't in. Then Tom said he hadn't got candles enough, and he would slip
in the kitchen and get some more.  I didn't want him to try.  I said Jim
might wake up and come.  But Tom wanted to resk it; so we slid in there
and got three candles, and Tom laid five cents on the table for pay.
Then we got out, and I was in a sweat to get away; but nothing would do
Tom but he must crawl to where Jim was, on his hands and knees, and play
something on him.  I waited, and it seemed a good while, everything was
so still and lonesome.

As soon as Tom was back we cut along the path, around the garden fence,
and by and by fetched up on the steep top of the hill the other side of
the house.  Tom said he slipped Jim's hat off of his head and hung it
on a limb right over him, and Jim stirred a little, but he didn't wake.
Afterwards Jim said the witches be witched him and put him in a trance,
and rode him all over the State, and then set him under the trees again,
and hung his hat on a limb to show who done it.  And next time Jim told
it he said they rode him down to New Orleans; and, after that, every
time he told it he spread it more and more, till by and by he said they
rode him all over the world, and tired him most to death, and his back
was all over saddle-boils.  Jim was monstrous proud about it, and he
got so he wouldn't hardly notice the other niggers.  Niggers would come
miles to hear Jim tell about it, and he was more looked up to than any
nigger in that country.  Strange niggers would stand with their mouths
open and look him all over, same as if he was a wonder.  Niggers is
always talking about witches in the dark by the kitchen fire; but
whenever one was talking and letting on to know all about such things,
Jim would happen in and say, “Hm!  What you know 'bout witches?” and
that nigger was corked up and had to take a back seat.  Jim always kept
that five-center piece round his neck with a string, and said it was a
charm the devil give to him with his own hands, and told him he could
cure anybody with it and fetch witches whenever he wanted to just by
saying something to it; but he never told what it was he said to it.
 Niggers would come from all around there and give Jim anything they
had, just for a sight of that five-center piece; but they wouldn't touch
it, because the devil had had his hands on it.  Jim was most ruined for
a servant, because he got stuck up on account of having seen the devil
and been rode by witches.

Well, when Tom and me got to the edge of the hilltop we looked away down
into the village and could see three or four lights twinkling, where
there was sick folks, maybe; and the stars over us was sparkling ever
so fine; and down by the village was the river, a whole mile broad, and
awful still and grand.  We went down the hill and found Jo Harper and
Ben Rogers, and two or three more of the boys, hid in the old tanyard.
 So we unhitched a skiff and pulled down the river two mile and a half,
to the big scar on the hillside, and went ashore.

We went to a clump of bushes, and Tom made everybody swear to keep the
secret, and then showed them a hole in the hill, right in the thickest
part of the bushes.  Then we lit the candles, and crawled in on our
hands and knees.  We went about two hundred yards, and then the cave
opened up. Tom poked about amongst the passages, and pretty soon ducked
under a wall where you wouldn't a noticed that there was a hole.  We
went along a narrow place and got into a kind of room, all damp and
sweaty and cold, and there we stopped.  Tom says:

“Now, we'll start this band of robbers and call it Tom Sawyer's Gang.
Everybody that wants to join has got to take an oath, and write his name
in blood.”

Everybody was willing.  So Tom got out a sheet of paper that he had
wrote the oath on, and read it.  It swore every boy to stick to the
band, and never tell any of the secrets; and if anybody done anything to
any boy in the band, whichever boy was ordered to kill that person and
his family must do it, and he mustn't eat and he mustn't sleep till he
had killed them and hacked a cross in their breasts, which was the sign
of the band. And nobody that didn't belong to the band could use that
mark, and if he did he must be sued; and if he done it again he must be
killed.  And if anybody that belonged to the band told the secrets, he
must have his throat cut, and then have his carcass burnt up and the
ashes scattered all around, and his name blotted off of the list with
blood and never mentioned again by the gang, but have a curse put on it
and be forgot forever.

Everybody said it was a real beautiful oath, and asked Tom if he got
it out of his own head.  He said, some of it, but the rest was out of
pirate-books and robber-books, and every gang that was high-toned had
it.

Some thought it would be good to kill the _families_ of boys that told
the secrets.  Tom said it was a good idea, so he took a pencil and wrote
it in. Then Ben Rogers says:

“Here's Huck Finn, he hain't got no family; what you going to do 'bout
him?”

“Well, hain't he got a father?” says Tom Sawyer.

“Yes, he's got a father, but you can't never find him these days.  He
used to lay drunk with the hogs in the tanyard, but he hain't been seen
in these parts for a year or more.”

They talked it over, and they was going to rule me out, because they
said every boy must have a family or somebody to kill, or else it
wouldn't be fair and square for the others.  Well, nobody could think of
anything to do--everybody was stumped, and set still.  I was most ready
to cry; but all at once I thought of a way, and so I offered them Miss
Watson--they could kill her.  Everybody said:

“Oh, she'll do.  That's all right.  Huck can come in.”

Then they all stuck a pin in their fingers to get blood to sign with,
and I made my mark on the paper.

“Now,” says Ben Rogers, “what's the line of business of this Gang?”

“Nothing only robbery and murder,” Tom said.

“But who are we going to rob?--houses, or cattle, or--”

“Stuff! stealing cattle and such things ain't robbery; it's burglary,”
 says Tom Sawyer.  “We ain't burglars.  That ain't no sort of style.  We
are highwaymen.  We stop stages and carriages on the road, with masks
on, and kill the people and take their watches and money.”

“Must we always kill the people?”

“Oh, certainly.  It's best.  Some authorities think different, but
mostly it's considered best to kill them--except some that you bring to
the cave here, and keep them till they're ransomed.”

“Ransomed?  What's that?”

“I don't know.  But that's what they do.  I've seen it in books; and so
of course that's what we've got to do.”

“But how can we do it if we don't know what it is?”

“Why, blame it all, we've _got_ to do it.  Don't I tell you it's in the
books?  Do you want to go to doing different from what's in the books,
and get things all muddled up?”

“Oh, that's all very fine to _say_, Tom Sawyer, but how in the nation
are these fellows going to be ransomed if we don't know how to do it
to them?--that's the thing I want to get at.  Now, what do you reckon it
is?”

“Well, I don't know.  But per'aps if we keep them till they're ransomed,
it means that we keep them till they're dead.”

“Now, that's something _like_.  That'll answer.  Why couldn't you said
that before?  We'll keep them till they're ransomed to death; and a
bothersome lot they'll be, too--eating up everything, and always trying
to get loose.”

“How you talk, Ben Rogers.  How can they get loose when there's a guard
over them, ready to shoot them down if they move a peg?”

“A guard!  Well, that _is_ good.  So somebody's got to set up all night
and never get any sleep, just so as to watch them.  I think that's
foolishness. Why can't a body take a club and ransom them as soon as
they get here?”

“Because it ain't in the books so--that's why.  Now, Ben Rogers, do you
want to do things regular, or don't you?--that's the idea.  Don't you
reckon that the people that made the books knows what's the correct
thing to do?  Do you reckon _you_ can learn 'em anything?  Not by a good
deal. No, sir, we'll just go on and ransom them in the regular way.”

“All right.  I don't mind; but I say it's a fool way, anyhow.  Say, do
we kill the women, too?”

“Well, Ben Rogers, if I was as ignorant as you I wouldn't let on.  Kill
the women?  No; nobody ever saw anything in the books like that.  You
fetch them to the cave, and you're always as polite as pie to them;
and by and by they fall in love with you, and never want to go home any
more.”

“Well, if that's the way I'm agreed, but I don't take no stock in it.
Mighty soon we'll have the cave so cluttered up with women, and fellows
waiting to be ransomed, that there won't be no place for the robbers.
But go ahead, I ain't got nothing to say.”

Little Tommy Barnes was asleep now, and when they waked him up he was
scared, and cried, and said he wanted to go home to his ma, and didn't
want to be a robber any more.

So they all made fun of him, and called him cry-baby, and that made him
mad, and he said he would go straight and tell all the secrets.  But
Tom give him five cents to keep quiet, and said we would all go home and
meet next week, and rob somebody and kill some people.

Ben Rogers said he couldn't get out much, only Sundays, and so he wanted
to begin next Sunday; but all the boys said it would be wicked to do it
on Sunday, and that settled the thing.  They agreed to get together and
fix a day as soon as they could, and then we elected Tom Sawyer first
captain and Jo Harper second captain of the Gang, and so started home.

I clumb up the shed and crept into my window just before day was
breaking. My new clothes was all greased up and clayey, and I was
dog-tired.




CHAPTER III.

WELL, I got a good going-over in the morning from old Miss Watson on
account of my clothes; but the widow she didn't scold, but only cleaned
off the grease and clay, and looked so sorry that I thought I would
behave awhile if I could.  Then Miss Watson she took me in the closet
and prayed, but nothing come of it.  She told me to pray every day, and
whatever I asked for I would get it.  But it warn't so.  I tried it.
Once I got a fish-line, but no hooks.  It warn't any good to me without
hooks.  I tried for the hooks three or four times, but somehow I
couldn't make it work.  By and by, one day, I asked Miss Watson to
try for me, but she said I was a fool.  She never told me why, and I
couldn't make it out no way.

I set down one time back in the woods, and had a long think about it.
 I says to myself, if a body can get anything they pray for, why don't
Deacon Winn get back the money he lost on pork?  Why can't the widow get
back her silver snuffbox that was stole?  Why can't Miss Watson fat up?
No, says I to my self, there ain't nothing in it.  I went and told the
widow about it, and she said the thing a body could get by praying for
it was “spiritual gifts.”  This was too many for me, but she told me
what she meant--I must help other people, and do everything I could for
other people, and look out for them all the time, and never think about
myself. This was including Miss Watson, as I took it.  I went out in the
woods and turned it over in my mind a long time, but I couldn't see no
advantage about it--except for the other people; so at last I reckoned
I wouldn't worry about it any more, but just let it go.  Sometimes the
widow would take me one side and talk about Providence in a way to make
a body's mouth water; but maybe next day Miss Watson would take hold
and knock it all down again.  I judged I could see that there was two
Providences, and a poor chap would stand considerable show with the
widow's Providence, but if Miss Watson's got him there warn't no help
for him any more.  I thought it all out, and reckoned I would belong
to the widow's if he wanted me, though I couldn't make out how he was
a-going to be any better off then than what he was before, seeing I was
so ignorant, and so kind of low-down and ornery.

Pap he hadn't been seen for more than a year, and that was comfortable
for me; I didn't want to see him no more.  He used to always whale me
when he was sober and could get his hands on me; though I used to take
to the woods most of the time when he was around.  Well, about this time
he was found in the river drownded, about twelve mile above town, so
people said.  They judged it was him, anyway; said this drownded man was
just his size, and was ragged, and had uncommon long hair, which was all
like pap; but they couldn't make nothing out of the face, because it had
been in the water so long it warn't much like a face at all.  They said
he was floating on his back in the water.  They took him and buried him
on the bank.  But I warn't comfortable long, because I happened to think
of something.  I knowed mighty well that a drownded man don't float on
his back, but on his face.  So I knowed, then, that this warn't pap, but
a woman dressed up in a man's clothes.  So I was uncomfortable again.
 I judged the old man would turn up again by and by, though I wished he
wouldn't.

We played robber now and then about a month, and then I resigned.  All
the boys did.  We hadn't robbed nobody, hadn't killed any people, but
only just pretended.  We used to hop out of the woods and go charging
down on hog-drivers and women in carts taking garden stuff to market,
but we never hived any of them.  Tom Sawyer called the hogs “ingots,”
 and he called the turnips and stuff “julery,” and we would go to the
cave and powwow over what we had done, and how many people we had killed
and marked.  But I couldn't see no profit in it.  One time Tom sent a
boy to run about town with a blazing stick, which he called a slogan
(which was the sign for the Gang to get together), and then he said he
had got secret news by his spies that next day a whole parcel of Spanish
merchants and rich A-rabs was going to camp in Cave Hollow with two
hundred elephants, and six hundred camels, and over a thousand “sumter”
 mules, all loaded down with di'monds, and they didn't have only a guard
of four hundred soldiers, and so we would lay in ambuscade, as he called
it, and kill the lot and scoop the things.  He said we must slick up
our swords and guns, and get ready.  He never could go after even a
turnip-cart but he must have the swords and guns all scoured up for it,
though they was only lath and broomsticks, and you might scour at them
till you rotted, and then they warn't worth a mouthful of ashes more
than what they was before.  I didn't believe we could lick such a crowd
of Spaniards and A-rabs, but I wanted to see the camels and elephants,
so I was on hand next day, Saturday, in the ambuscade; and when we got
the word we rushed out of the woods and down the hill.  But there warn't
no Spaniards and A-rabs, and there warn't no camels nor no elephants.
 It warn't anything but a Sunday-school picnic, and only a primer-class
at that.  We busted it up, and chased the children up the hollow; but we
never got anything but some doughnuts and jam, though Ben Rogers got
a rag doll, and Jo Harper got a hymn-book and a tract; and then the
teacher charged in, and made us drop everything and cut.

 I didn't see no di'monds, and I told Tom Sawyer so.  He said there was
loads of them there, anyway; and he said there was A-rabs there, too,
and elephants and things.  I said, why couldn't we see them, then?  He
said if I warn't so ignorant, but had read a book called Don Quixote, I
would know without asking.  He said it was all done by enchantment.  He
said there was hundreds of soldiers there, and elephants and treasure,
and so on, but we had enemies which he called magicians; and they had
turned the whole thing into an infant Sunday-school, just out of spite.
 I said, all right; then the thing for us to do was to go for the
magicians.  Tom Sawyer said I was a numskull.

“Why,” said he, “a magician could call up a lot of genies, and they
would hash you up like nothing before you could say Jack Robinson.  They
are as tall as a tree and as big around as a church.”

“Well,” I says, “s'pose we got some genies to help _us_--can't we lick
the other crowd then?”

“How you going to get them?”

“I don't know.  How do _they_ get them?”

“Why, they rub an old tin lamp or an iron ring, and then the genies
come tearing in, with the thunder and lightning a-ripping around and the
smoke a-rolling, and everything they're told to do they up and do it.
 They don't think nothing of pulling a shot-tower up by the roots, and
belting a Sunday-school superintendent over the head with it--or any
other man.”

“Who makes them tear around so?”

“Why, whoever rubs the lamp or the ring.  They belong to whoever rubs
the lamp or the ring, and they've got to do whatever he says.  If he
tells them to build a palace forty miles long out of di'monds, and fill
it full of chewing-gum, or whatever you want, and fetch an emperor's
daughter from China for you to marry, they've got to do it--and they've
got to do it before sun-up next morning, too.  And more:  they've got
to waltz that palace around over the country wherever you want it, you
understand.”

“Well,” says I, “I think they are a pack of flat-heads for not keeping
the palace themselves 'stead of fooling them away like that.  And what's
more--if I was one of them I would see a man in Jericho before I would
drop my business and come to him for the rubbing of an old tin lamp.”

“How you talk, Huck Finn.  Why, you'd _have_ to come when he rubbed it,
whether you wanted to or not.”

“What! and I as high as a tree and as big as a church?  All right, then;
I _would_ come; but I lay I'd make that man climb the highest tree there
was in the country.”

“Shucks, it ain't no use to talk to you, Huck Finn.  You don't seem to
know anything, somehow--perfect saphead.”

I thought all this over for two or three days, and then I reckoned I
would see if there was anything in it.  I got an old tin lamp and an
iron ring, and went out in the woods and rubbed and rubbed till I sweat
like an Injun, calculating to build a palace and sell it; but it warn't
no use, none of the genies come.  So then I judged that all that stuff
was only just one of Tom Sawyer's lies.  I reckoned he believed in the
A-rabs and the elephants, but as for me I think different.  It had all
the marks of a Sunday-school.




CHAPTER IV.

WELL, three or four months run along, and it was well into the winter
now. I had been to school most all the time and could spell and read and
write just a little, and could say the multiplication table up to six
times seven is thirty-five, and I don't reckon I could ever get any
further than that if I was to live forever.  I don't take no stock in
mathematics, anyway.

At first I hated the school, but by and by I got so I could stand it.
Whenever I got uncommon tired I played hookey, and the hiding I got next
day done me good and cheered me up.  So the longer I went to school the
easier it got to be.  I was getting sort of used to the widow's ways,
too, and they warn't so raspy on me.  Living in a house and sleeping in
a bed pulled on me pretty tight mostly, but before the cold weather I
used to slide out and sleep in the woods sometimes, and so that was a
rest to me.  I liked the old ways best, but I was getting so I liked the
new ones, too, a little bit. The widow said I was coming along slow but
sure, and doing very satisfactory.  She said she warn't ashamed of me.

One morning I happened to turn over the salt-cellar at breakfast.
 I reached for some of it as quick as I could to throw over my left
shoulder and keep off the bad luck, but Miss Watson was in ahead of me,
and crossed me off. She says, “Take your hands away, Huckleberry; what
a mess you are always making!”  The widow put in a good word for me, but
that warn't going to keep off the bad luck, I knowed that well enough.
 I started out, after breakfast, feeling worried and shaky, and
wondering where it was going to fall on me, and what it was going to be.
 There is ways to keep off some kinds of bad luck, but this wasn't one
of them kind; so I never tried to do anything, but just poked along
low-spirited and on the watch-out.

I went down to the front garden and clumb over the stile where you go
through the high board fence.  There was an inch of new snow on the
ground, and I seen somebody's tracks.  They had come up from the quarry
and stood around the stile a while, and then went on around the garden
fence.  It was funny they hadn't come in, after standing around so.  I
couldn't make it out.  It was very curious, somehow.  I was going to
follow around, but I stooped down to look at the tracks first.  I didn't
notice anything at first, but next I did.  There was a cross in the left
boot-heel made with big nails, to keep off the devil.

I was up in a second and shinning down the hill.  I looked over my
shoulder every now and then, but I didn't see nobody.  I was at Judge
Thatcher's as quick as I could get there.  He said:

“Why, my boy, you are all out of breath.  Did you come for your
interest?”

“No, sir,” I says; “is there some for me?”

“Oh, yes, a half-yearly is in last night--over a hundred and fifty
dollars.  Quite a fortune for you.  You had better let me invest it
along with your six thousand, because if you take it you'll spend it.”

“No, sir,” I says, “I don't want to spend it.  I don't want it at
all--nor the six thousand, nuther.  I want you to take it; I want to give
it to you--the six thousand and all.”

He looked surprised.  He couldn't seem to make it out.  He says:

“Why, what can you mean, my boy?”

I says, “Don't you ask me no questions about it, please.  You'll take
it--won't you?”

He says:

“Well, I'm puzzled.  Is something the matter?”

“Please take it,” says I, “and don't ask me nothing--then I won't have to
tell no lies.”

He studied a while, and then he says:

“Oho-o!  I think I see.  You want to _sell_ all your property to me--not
give it.  That's the correct idea.”

Then he wrote something on a paper and read it over, and says:

“There; you see it says 'for a consideration.'  That means I have bought
it of you and paid you for it.  Here's a dollar for you.  Now you sign
it.”

So I signed it, and left.

Miss Watson's nigger, Jim, had a hair-ball as big as your fist, which
had been took out of the fourth stomach of an ox, and he used to do
magic with it.  He said there was a spirit inside of it, and it knowed
everything.  So I went to him that night and told him pap was here
again, for I found his tracks in the snow.  What I wanted to know was,
what he was going to do, and was he going to stay?  Jim got out his
hair-ball and said something over it, and then he held it up and dropped
it on the floor.  It fell pretty solid, and only rolled about an inch.
 Jim tried it again, and then another time, and it acted just the same.
 Jim got down on his knees, and put his ear against it and listened.
 But it warn't no use; he said it wouldn't talk. He said sometimes it
wouldn't talk without money.  I told him I had an old slick counterfeit
quarter that warn't no good because the brass showed through the silver
a little, and it wouldn't pass nohow, even if the brass didn't show,
because it was so slick it felt greasy, and so that would tell on it
every time.  (I reckoned I wouldn't say nothing about the dollar I got
from the judge.) I said it was pretty bad money, but maybe the hair-ball
would take it, because maybe it wouldn't know the difference.  Jim smelt
it and bit it and rubbed it, and said he would manage so the hair-ball
would think it was good.  He said he would split open a raw Irish potato
and stick the quarter in between and keep it there all night, and next
morning you couldn't see no brass, and it wouldn't feel greasy no more,
and so anybody in town would take it in a minute, let alone a hair-ball.
 Well, I knowed a potato would do that before, but I had forgot it.

Jim put the quarter under the hair-ball, and got down and listened
again. This time he said the hair-ball was all right.  He said it
would tell my whole fortune if I wanted it to.  I says, go on.  So the
hair-ball talked to Jim, and Jim told it to me.  He says:

“Yo' ole father doan' know yit what he's a-gwyne to do.  Sometimes he
spec he'll go 'way, en den agin he spec he'll stay.  De bes' way is to
res' easy en let de ole man take his own way.  Dey's two angels hoverin'
roun' 'bout him.  One uv 'em is white en shiny, en t'other one is black.
De white one gits him to go right a little while, den de black one sail
in en bust it all up.  A body can't tell yit which one gwyne to fetch
him at de las'.  But you is all right.  You gwyne to have considable
trouble in yo' life, en considable joy.  Sometimes you gwyne to git
hurt, en sometimes you gwyne to git sick; but every time you's gwyne
to git well agin.  Dey's two gals flyin' 'bout you in yo' life.  One
uv 'em's light en t'other one is dark. One is rich en t'other is po'.
 You's gwyne to marry de po' one fust en de rich one by en by.  You
wants to keep 'way fum de water as much as you kin, en don't run no
resk, 'kase it's down in de bills dat you's gwyne to git hung.”

When I lit my candle and went up to my room that night there sat pap his
own self!




CHAPTER V.

I had shut the door to.  Then I turned around and there he was.  I used
to be scared of him all the time, he tanned me so much.  I reckoned I
was scared now, too; but in a minute I see I was mistaken--that is, after
the first jolt, as you may say, when my breath sort of hitched, he being
so unexpected; but right away after I see I warn't scared of him worth
bothring about.

He was most fifty, and he looked it.  His hair was long and tangled and
greasy, and hung down, and you could see his eyes shining through
like he was behind vines.  It was all black, no gray; so was his long,
mixed-up whiskers.  There warn't no color in his face, where his face
showed; it was white; not like another man's white, but a white to make
a body sick, a white to make a body's flesh crawl--a tree-toad white, a
fish-belly white.  As for his clothes--just rags, that was all.  He had
one ankle resting on t'other knee; the boot on that foot was busted, and
two of his toes stuck through, and he worked them now and then.  His hat
was laying on the floor--an old black slouch with the top caved in, like
a lid.

I stood a-looking at him; he set there a-looking at me, with his chair
tilted back a little.  I set the candle down.  I noticed the window was
up; so he had clumb in by the shed.  He kept a-looking me all over.  By
and by he says:

“Starchy clothes--very.  You think you're a good deal of a big-bug,
_don't_ you?”

“Maybe I am, maybe I ain't,” I says.

“Don't you give me none o' your lip,” says he.  “You've put on
considerable many frills since I been away.  I'll take you down a peg
before I get done with you.  You're educated, too, they say--can read and
write.  You think you're better'n your father, now, don't you, because
he can't?  _I'll_ take it out of you.  Who told you you might meddle
with such hifalut'n foolishness, hey?--who told you you could?”

“The widow.  She told me.”

“The widow, hey?--and who told the widow she could put in her shovel
about a thing that ain't none of her business?”

“Nobody never told her.”

“Well, I'll learn her how to meddle.  And looky here--you drop that
school, you hear?  I'll learn people to bring up a boy to put on airs
over his own father and let on to be better'n what _he_ is.  You lemme
catch you fooling around that school again, you hear?  Your mother
couldn't read, and she couldn't write, nuther, before she died.  None
of the family couldn't before _they_ died.  I can't; and here you're
a-swelling yourself up like this.  I ain't the man to stand it--you hear?
Say, lemme hear you read.”

I took up a book and begun something about General Washington and the
wars. When I'd read about a half a minute, he fetched the book a whack
with his hand and knocked it across the house.  He says:

“It's so.  You can do it.  I had my doubts when you told me.  Now looky
here; you stop that putting on frills.  I won't have it.  I'll lay for
you, my smarty; and if I catch you about that school I'll tan you good.
First you know you'll get religion, too.  I never see such a son.”

He took up a little blue and yaller picture of some cows and a boy, and
says:

“What's this?”

“It's something they give me for learning my lessons good.”

He tore it up, and says:

“I'll give you something better--I'll give you a cowhide.”

He set there a-mumbling and a-growling a minute, and then he says:

“_Ain't_ you a sweet-scented dandy, though?  A bed; and bedclothes; and
a look'n'-glass; and a piece of carpet on the floor--and your own father
got to sleep with the hogs in the tanyard.  I never see such a son.  I
bet I'll take some o' these frills out o' you before I'm done with you.
Why, there ain't no end to your airs--they say you're rich.  Hey?--how's
that?”

“They lie--that's how.”

“Looky here--mind how you talk to me; I'm a-standing about all I can
stand now--so don't gimme no sass.  I've been in town two days, and I
hain't heard nothing but about you bein' rich.  I heard about it
away down the river, too.  That's why I come.  You git me that money
to-morrow--I want it.”

“I hain't got no money.”

“It's a lie.  Judge Thatcher's got it.  You git it.  I want it.”

“I hain't got no money, I tell you.  You ask Judge Thatcher; he'll tell
you the same.”

“All right.  I'll ask him; and I'll make him pungle, too, or I'll know
the reason why.  Say, how much you got in your pocket?  I want it.”

“I hain't got only a dollar, and I want that to--”

“It don't make no difference what you want it for--you just shell it
out.”

He took it and bit it to see if it was good, and then he said he was
going down town to get some whisky; said he hadn't had a drink all day.
When he had got out on the shed he put his head in again, and cussed
me for putting on frills and trying to be better than him; and when I
reckoned he was gone he come back and put his head in again, and told me
to mind about that school, because he was going to lay for me and lick
me if I didn't drop that.

Next day he was drunk, and he went to Judge Thatcher's and bullyragged
him, and tried to make him give up the money; but he couldn't, and then
he swore he'd make the law force him.

The judge and the widow went to law to get the court to take me away
from him and let one of them be my guardian; but it was a new judge that
had just come, and he didn't know the old man; so he said courts mustn't
interfere and separate families if they could help it; said he'd druther
not take a child away from its father.  So Judge Thatcher and the widow
had to quit on the business.

That pleased the old man till he couldn't rest.  He said he'd cowhide
me till I was black and blue if I didn't raise some money for him.  I
borrowed three dollars from Judge Thatcher, and pap took it and got
drunk, and went a-blowing around and cussing and whooping and carrying
on; and he kept it up all over town, with a tin pan, till most midnight;
then they jailed him, and next day they had him before court, and jailed
him again for a week.  But he said _he_ was satisfied; said he was boss
of his son, and he'd make it warm for _him_.

When he got out the new judge said he was a-going to make a man of him.
So he took him to his own house, and dressed him up clean and nice, and
had him to breakfast and dinner and supper with the family, and was just
old pie to him, so to speak.  And after supper he talked to him about
temperance and such things till the old man cried, and said he'd been
a fool, and fooled away his life; but now he was a-going to turn over
a new leaf and be a man nobody wouldn't be ashamed of, and he hoped the
judge would help him and not look down on him.  The judge said he could
hug him for them words; so he cried, and his wife she cried again; pap
said he'd been a man that had always been misunderstood before, and the
judge said he believed it.  The old man said that what a man wanted
that was down was sympathy, and the judge said it was so; so they cried
again.  And when it was bedtime the old man rose up and held out his
hand, and says:

“Look at it, gentlemen and ladies all; take a-hold of it; shake it.
There's a hand that was the hand of a hog; but it ain't so no more; it's
the hand of a man that's started in on a new life, and'll die before
he'll go back.  You mark them words--don't forget I said them.  It's a
clean hand now; shake it--don't be afeard.”

So they shook it, one after the other, all around, and cried.  The
judge's wife she kissed it.  Then the old man he signed a pledge--made
his mark. The judge said it was the holiest time on record, or something
like that. Then they tucked the old man into a beautiful room, which was
the spare room, and in the night some time he got powerful thirsty and
clumb out on to the porch-roof and slid down a stanchion and traded his
new coat for a jug of forty-rod, and clumb back again and had a good old
time; and towards daylight he crawled out again, drunk as a fiddler, and
rolled off the porch and broke his left arm in two places, and was most
froze to death when somebody found him after sun-up.  And when they come
to look at that spare room they had to take soundings before they could
navigate it.

The judge he felt kind of sore.  He said he reckoned a body could reform
the old man with a shotgun, maybe, but he didn't know no other way.




CHAPTER VI.

WELL, pretty soon the old man was up and around again, and then he went
for Judge Thatcher in the courts to make him give up that money, and he
went for me, too, for not stopping school.  He catched me a couple of
times and thrashed me, but I went to school just the same, and dodged
him or outrun him most of the time.  I didn't want to go to school much
before, but I reckoned I'd go now to spite pap.  That law trial was a
slow business--appeared like they warn't ever going to get started on it;
so every now and then I'd borrow two or three dollars off of the judge
for him, to keep from getting a cowhiding.  Every time he got money he
got drunk; and every time he got drunk he raised Cain around town; and
every time he raised Cain he got jailed.  He was just suited--this kind
of thing was right in his line.

He got to hanging around the widow's too much and so she told him at
last that if he didn't quit using around there she would make trouble
for him. Well, _wasn't_ he mad?  He said he would show who was Huck
Finn's boss.  So he watched out for me one day in the spring, and
catched me, and took me up the river about three mile in a skiff, and
crossed over to the Illinois shore where it was woody and there warn't
no houses but an old log hut in a place where the timber was so thick
you couldn't find it if you didn't know where it was.

He kept me with him all the time, and I never got a chance to run off.
We lived in that old cabin, and he always locked the door and put the
key under his head nights.  He had a gun which he had stole, I reckon,
and we fished and hunted, and that was what we lived on.  Every little
while he locked me in and went down to the store, three miles, to the
ferry, and traded fish and game for whisky, and fetched it home and got
drunk and had a good time, and licked me.  The widow she found out where
I was by and by, and she sent a man over to try to get hold of me; but
pap drove him off with the gun, and it warn't long after that till I was
used to being where I was, and liked it--all but the cowhide part.

It was kind of lazy and jolly, laying off comfortable all day, smoking
and fishing, and no books nor study.  Two months or more run along, and
my clothes got to be all rags and dirt, and I didn't see how I'd ever
got to like it so well at the widow's, where you had to wash, and eat on
a plate, and comb up, and go to bed and get up regular, and be forever
bothering over a book, and have old Miss Watson pecking at you all the
time.  I didn't want to go back no more.  I had stopped cussing, because
the widow didn't like it; but now I took to it again because pap hadn't
no objections.  It was pretty good times up in the woods there, take it
all around.

But by and by pap got too handy with his hick'ry, and I couldn't stand
it. I was all over welts.  He got to going away so much, too, and
locking me in.  Once he locked me in and was gone three days.  It was
dreadful lonesome.  I judged he had got drownded, and I wasn't ever
going to get out any more.  I was scared.  I made up my mind I would fix
up some way to leave there.  I had tried to get out of that cabin many
a time, but I couldn't find no way.  There warn't a window to it big
enough for a dog to get through.  I couldn't get up the chimbly; it
was too narrow.  The door was thick, solid oak slabs.  Pap was pretty
careful not to leave a knife or anything in the cabin when he was away;
I reckon I had hunted the place over as much as a hundred times; well, I
was most all the time at it, because it was about the only way to put in
the time.  But this time I found something at last; I found an old rusty
wood-saw without any handle; it was laid in between a rafter and the
clapboards of the roof. I greased it up and went to work.  There was an
old horse-blanket nailed against the logs at the far end of the cabin
behind the table, to keep the wind from blowing through the chinks and
putting the candle out.  I got under the table and raised the blanket,
and went to work to saw a section of the big bottom log out--big enough
to let me through.  Well, it was a good long job, but I was getting
towards the end of it when I heard pap's gun in the woods.  I got rid of
the signs of my work, and dropped the blanket and hid my saw, and pretty
soon pap come in.

Pap warn't in a good humor--so he was his natural self.  He said he was
down town, and everything was going wrong.  His lawyer said he reckoned
he would win his lawsuit and get the money if they ever got started on
the trial; but then there was ways to put it off a long time, and Judge
Thatcher knowed how to do it. And he said people allowed there'd be
another trial to get me away from him and give me to the widow for my
guardian, and they guessed it would win this time.  This shook me up
considerable, because I didn't want to go back to the widow's any more
and be so cramped up and sivilized, as they called it.  Then the old man
got to cussing, and cussed everything and everybody he could think of,
and then cussed them all over again to make sure he hadn't skipped any,
and after that he polished off with a kind of a general cuss all round,
including a considerable parcel of people which he didn't know the names
of, and so called them what's-his-name when he got to them, and went
right along with his cussing.

He said he would like to see the widow get me.  He said he would watch
out, and if they tried to come any such game on him he knowed of a place
six or seven mile off to stow me in, where they might hunt till they
dropped and they couldn't find me.  That made me pretty uneasy again,
but only for a minute; I reckoned I wouldn't stay on hand till he got
that chance.

The old man made me go to the skiff and fetch the things he had
got. There was a fifty-pound sack of corn meal, and a side of bacon,
ammunition, and a four-gallon jug of whisky, and an old book and two
newspapers for wadding, besides some tow.  I toted up a load, and went
back and set down on the bow of the skiff to rest.  I thought it all
over, and I reckoned I would walk off with the gun and some lines, and
take to the woods when I run away.  I guessed I wouldn't stay in one
place, but just tramp right across the country, mostly night times, and
hunt and fish to keep alive, and so get so far away that the old man nor
the widow couldn't ever find me any more.  I judged I would saw out and
leave that night if pap got drunk enough, and I reckoned he would.  I
got so full of it I didn't notice how long I was staying till the old
man hollered and asked me whether I was asleep or drownded.

I got the things all up to the cabin, and then it was about dark.  While
I was cooking supper the old man took a swig or two and got sort of
warmed up, and went to ripping again.  He had been drunk over in town,
and laid in the gutter all night, and he was a sight to look at.  A body
would a thought he was Adam--he was just all mud.  Whenever his liquor
begun to work he most always went for the govment, this time he says:

“Call this a govment! why, just look at it and see what it's like.
Here's the law a-standing ready to take a man's son away from him--a
man's own son, which he has had all the trouble and all the anxiety
and all the expense of raising.  Yes, just as that man has got that
son raised at last, and ready to go to work and begin to do suthin' for
_him_ and give him a rest, the law up and goes for him.  And they call
_that_ govment!  That ain't all, nuther.  The law backs that old Judge
Thatcher up and helps him to keep me out o' my property.  Here's what
the law does:  The law takes a man worth six thousand dollars and
up'ards, and jams him into an old trap of a cabin like this, and lets
him go round in clothes that ain't fitten for a hog. They call that
govment!  A man can't get his rights in a govment like this. Sometimes
I've a mighty notion to just leave the country for good and all. Yes,
and I _told_ 'em so; I told old Thatcher so to his face.  Lots of 'em
heard me, and can tell what I said.  Says I, for two cents I'd leave the
blamed country and never come a-near it agin.  Them's the very words.  I
says look at my hat--if you call it a hat--but the lid raises up and the
rest of it goes down till it's below my chin, and then it ain't rightly
a hat at all, but more like my head was shoved up through a jint o'
stove-pipe.  Look at it, says I--such a hat for me to wear--one of the
wealthiest men in this town if I could git my rights.

“Oh, yes, this is a wonderful govment, wonderful.  Why, looky here.
There was a free nigger there from Ohio--a mulatter, most as white as
a white man.  He had the whitest shirt on you ever see, too, and the
shiniest hat; and there ain't a man in that town that's got as fine
clothes as what he had; and he had a gold watch and chain, and a
silver-headed cane--the awfulest old gray-headed nabob in the State.  And
what do you think?  They said he was a p'fessor in a college, and could
talk all kinds of languages, and knowed everything.  And that ain't the
wust. They said he could _vote_ when he was at home.  Well, that let me
out. Thinks I, what is the country a-coming to?  It was 'lection day,
and I was just about to go and vote myself if I warn't too drunk to get
there; but when they told me there was a State in this country where
they'd let that nigger vote, I drawed out.  I says I'll never vote agin.
 Them's the very words I said; they all heard me; and the country may
rot for all me--I'll never vote agin as long as I live.  And to see the
cool way of that nigger--why, he wouldn't a give me the road if I hadn't
shoved him out o' the way.  I says to the people, why ain't this nigger
put up at auction and sold?--that's what I want to know.  And what do you
reckon they said? Why, they said he couldn't be sold till he'd been in
the State six months, and he hadn't been there that long yet.  There,
now--that's a specimen.  They call that a govment that can't sell a free
nigger till he's been in the State six months.  Here's a govment that
calls itself a govment, and lets on to be a govment, and thinks it is a
govment, and yet's got to set stock-still for six whole months before
it can take a hold of a prowling, thieving, infernal, white-shirted free
nigger, and--”

Pap was agoing on so he never noticed where his old limber legs was
taking him to, so he went head over heels over the tub of salt pork and
barked both shins, and the rest of his speech was all the hottest kind
of language--mostly hove at the nigger and the govment, though he give
the tub some, too, all along, here and there.  He hopped around the
cabin considerable, first on one leg and then on the other, holding
first one shin and then the other one, and at last he let out with his
left foot all of a sudden and fetched the tub a rattling kick.  But it
warn't good judgment, because that was the boot that had a couple of his
toes leaking out of the front end of it; so now he raised a howl that
fairly made a body's hair raise, and down he went in the dirt, and
rolled there, and held his toes; and the cussing he done then laid over
anything he had ever done previous.  He said so his own self afterwards.
 He had heard old Sowberry Hagan in his best days, and he said it laid
over him, too; but I reckon that was sort of piling it on, maybe.

After supper pap took the jug, and said he had enough whisky there
for two drunks and one delirium tremens.  That was always his word.  I
judged he would be blind drunk in about an hour, and then I would steal
the key, or saw myself out, one or t'other.  He drank and drank, and
tumbled down on his blankets by and by; but luck didn't run my way.
 He didn't go sound asleep, but was uneasy.  He groaned and moaned and
thrashed around this way and that for a long time.  At last I got so
sleepy I couldn't keep my eyes open all I could do, and so before I
knowed what I was about I was sound asleep, and the candle burning.

I don't know how long I was asleep, but all of a sudden there was an
awful scream and I was up.  There was pap looking wild, and skipping
around every which way and yelling about snakes.  He said they was
crawling up his legs; and then he would give a jump and scream, and say
one had bit him on the cheek--but I couldn't see no snakes.  He started
and run round and round the cabin, hollering “Take him off! take him
off! he's biting me on the neck!”  I never see a man look so wild in the
eyes. Pretty soon he was all fagged out, and fell down panting; then he
rolled over and over wonderful fast, kicking things every which way,
and striking and grabbing at the air with his hands, and screaming and
saying there was devils a-hold of him.  He wore out by and by, and laid
still a while, moaning.  Then he laid stiller, and didn't make a sound.
 I could hear the owls and the wolves away off in the woods, and it
seemed terrible still.  He was laying over by the corner. By and by he
raised up part way and listened, with his head to one side.  He says,
very low:

“Tramp--tramp--tramp; that's the dead; tramp--tramp--tramp; they're coming
after me; but I won't go.  Oh, they're here! don't touch me--don't! hands
off--they're cold; let go.  Oh, let a poor devil alone!”

Then he went down on all fours and crawled off, begging them to let him
alone, and he rolled himself up in his blanket and wallowed in under the
old pine table, still a-begging; and then he went to crying.  I could
hear him through the blanket.

By and by he rolled out and jumped up on his feet looking wild, and he
see me and went for me.  He chased me round and round the place with a
clasp-knife, calling me the Angel of Death, and saying he would kill me,
and then I couldn't come for him no more.  I begged, and told him I
was only Huck; but he laughed _such_ a screechy laugh, and roared and
cussed, and kept on chasing me up.  Once when I turned short and
dodged under his arm he made a grab and got me by the jacket between my
shoulders, and I thought I was gone; but I slid out of the jacket quick
as lightning, and saved myself. Pretty soon he was all tired out, and
dropped down with his back against the door, and said he would rest a
minute and then kill me. He put his knife under him, and said he would
sleep and get strong, and then he would see who was who.

So he dozed off pretty soon.  By and by I got the old split-bottom chair
and clumb up as easy as I could, not to make any noise, and got down the
gun.  I slipped the ramrod down it to make sure it was loaded, then I
laid it across the turnip barrel, pointing towards pap, and set down
behind it to wait for him to stir.  And how slow and still the time did
drag along.




CHAPTER VII.

“GIT up!  What you 'bout?”

I opened my eyes and looked around, trying to make out where I was.  It
was after sun-up, and I had been sound asleep.  Pap was standing over me
looking sour and sick, too.  He says:

“What you doin' with this gun?”

I judged he didn't know nothing about what he had been doing, so I says:

“Somebody tried to get in, so I was laying for him.”

“Why didn't you roust me out?”

“Well, I tried to, but I couldn't; I couldn't budge you.”

“Well, all right.  Don't stand there palavering all day, but out with
you and see if there's a fish on the lines for breakfast.  I'll be along
in a minute.”

He unlocked the door, and I cleared out up the river-bank.  I noticed
some pieces of limbs and such things floating down, and a sprinkling of
bark; so I knowed the river had begun to rise.  I reckoned I would have
great times now if I was over at the town.  The June rise used to be
always luck for me; because as soon as that rise begins here comes
cordwood floating down, and pieces of log rafts--sometimes a dozen logs
together; so all you have to do is to catch them and sell them to the
wood-yards and the sawmill.

I went along up the bank with one eye out for pap and t'other one out
for what the rise might fetch along.  Well, all at once here comes a
canoe; just a beauty, too, about thirteen or fourteen foot long, riding
high like a duck.  I shot head-first off of the bank like a frog,
clothes and all on, and struck out for the canoe.  I just expected
there'd be somebody laying down in it, because people often done that
to fool folks, and when a chap had pulled a skiff out most to it they'd
raise up and laugh at him.  But it warn't so this time.  It was a
drift-canoe sure enough, and I clumb in and paddled her ashore.  Thinks
I, the old man will be glad when he sees this--she's worth ten dollars.
 But when I got to shore pap wasn't in sight yet, and as I was running
her into a little creek like a gully, all hung over with vines and
willows, I struck another idea:  I judged I'd hide her good, and then,
'stead of taking to the woods when I run off, I'd go down the river
about fifty mile and camp in one place for good, and not have such a
rough time tramping on foot.

It was pretty close to the shanty, and I thought I heard the old man
coming all the time; but I got her hid; and then I out and looked around
a bunch of willows, and there was the old man down the path a piece just
drawing a bead on a bird with his gun.  So he hadn't seen anything.

When he got along I was hard at it taking up a “trot” line.  He abused
me a little for being so slow; but I told him I fell in the river, and
that was what made me so long.  I knowed he would see I was wet, and
then he would be asking questions.  We got five catfish off the lines
and went home.

While we laid off after breakfast to sleep up, both of us being about
wore out, I got to thinking that if I could fix up some way to keep pap
and the widow from trying to follow me, it would be a certainer thing
than trusting to luck to get far enough off before they missed me; you
see, all kinds of things might happen.  Well, I didn't see no way for a
while, but by and by pap raised up a minute to drink another barrel of
water, and he says:

“Another time a man comes a-prowling round here you roust me out, you
hear? That man warn't here for no good.  I'd a shot him.  Next time you
roust me out, you hear?”

Then he dropped down and went to sleep again; but what he had been
saying give me the very idea I wanted.  I says to myself, I can fix it
now so nobody won't think of following me.

About twelve o'clock we turned out and went along up the bank.  The
river was coming up pretty fast, and lots of driftwood going by on the
rise. By and by along comes part of a log raft--nine logs fast together.
 We went out with the skiff and towed it ashore.  Then we had dinner.
Anybody but pap would a waited and seen the day through, so as to catch
more stuff; but that warn't pap's style.  Nine logs was enough for one
time; he must shove right over to town and sell.  So he locked me in and
took the skiff, and started off towing the raft about half-past three.
 I judged he wouldn't come back that night.  I waited till I reckoned he
had got a good start; then I out with my saw, and went to work on that
log again.  Before he was t'other side of the river I was out of the
hole; him and his raft was just a speck on the water away off yonder.

I took the sack of corn meal and took it to where the canoe was hid, and
shoved the vines and branches apart and put it in; then I done the same
with the side of bacon; then the whisky-jug.  I took all the coffee and
sugar there was, and all the ammunition; I took the wadding; I took the
bucket and gourd; I took a dipper and a tin cup, and my old saw and two
blankets, and the skillet and the coffee-pot.  I took fish-lines and
matches and other things--everything that was worth a cent.  I cleaned
out the place.  I wanted an axe, but there wasn't any, only the one out
at the woodpile, and I knowed why I was going to leave that.  I fetched
out the gun, and now I was done.

I had wore the ground a good deal crawling out of the hole and dragging
out so many things.  So I fixed that as good as I could from the outside
by scattering dust on the place, which covered up the smoothness and the
sawdust.  Then I fixed the piece of log back into its place, and put two
rocks under it and one against it to hold it there, for it was bent up
at that place and didn't quite touch ground.  If you stood four or five
foot away and didn't know it was sawed, you wouldn't never notice
it; and besides, this was the back of the cabin, and it warn't likely
anybody would go fooling around there.

It was all grass clear to the canoe, so I hadn't left a track.  I
followed around to see.  I stood on the bank and looked out over the
river.  All safe.  So I took the gun and went up a piece into the woods,
and was hunting around for some birds when I see a wild pig; hogs soon
went wild in them bottoms after they had got away from the prairie
farms. I shot this fellow and took him into camp.

I took the axe and smashed in the door.  I beat it and hacked it
considerable a-doing it.  I fetched the pig in, and took him back nearly
to the table and hacked into his throat with the axe, and laid him down
on the ground to bleed; I say ground because it was ground--hard packed,
and no boards.  Well, next I took an old sack and put a lot of big rocks
in it--all I could drag--and I started it from the pig, and dragged it to
the door and through the woods down to the river and dumped it in, and
down it sunk, out of sight.  You could easy see that something had been
dragged over the ground.  I did wish Tom Sawyer was there; I knowed he
would take an interest in this kind of business, and throw in the fancy
touches.  Nobody could spread himself like Tom Sawyer in such a thing as
that.

Well, last I pulled out some of my hair, and blooded the axe good, and
stuck it on the back side, and slung the axe in the corner.  Then I
took up the pig and held him to my breast with my jacket (so he couldn't
drip) till I got a good piece below the house and then dumped him into
the river.  Now I thought of something else.  So I went and got the bag
of meal and my old saw out of the canoe, and fetched them to the house.
 I took the bag to where it used to stand, and ripped a hole in the
bottom of it with the saw, for there warn't no knives and forks on the
place--pap done everything with his clasp-knife about the cooking.  Then
I carried the sack about a hundred yards across the grass and through
the willows east of the house, to a shallow lake that was five mile wide
and full of rushes--and ducks too, you might say, in the season.  There
was a slough or a creek leading out of it on the other side that went
miles away, I don't know where, but it didn't go to the river.  The meal
sifted out and made a little track all the way to the lake.  I dropped
pap's whetstone there too, so as to look like it had been done by
accident. Then I tied up the rip in the meal sack with a string, so it
wouldn't leak no more, and took it and my saw to the canoe again.

It was about dark now; so I dropped the canoe down the river under some
willows that hung over the bank, and waited for the moon to rise.  I
made fast to a willow; then I took a bite to eat, and by and by laid
down in the canoe to smoke a pipe and lay out a plan.  I says to myself,
they'll follow the track of that sackful of rocks to the shore and then
drag the river for me.  And they'll follow that meal track to the lake
and go browsing down the creek that leads out of it to find the robbers
that killed me and took the things.  They won't ever hunt the river for
anything but my dead carcass. They'll soon get tired of that, and won't
bother no more about me.  All right; I can stop anywhere I want to.
Jackson's Island is good enough for me; I know that island pretty well,
and nobody ever comes there.  And then I can paddle over to town nights,
and slink around and pick up things I want. Jackson's Island's the
place.

I was pretty tired, and the first thing I knowed I was asleep.  When
I woke up I didn't know where I was for a minute.  I set up and looked
around, a little scared.  Then I remembered.  The river looked miles and
miles across.  The moon was so bright I could a counted the drift logs
that went a-slipping along, black and still, hundreds of yards out from
shore. Everything was dead quiet, and it looked late, and _smelt_ late.
You know what I mean--I don't know the words to put it in.

I took a good gap and a stretch, and was just going to unhitch and start
when I heard a sound away over the water.  I listened.  Pretty soon I
made it out.  It was that dull kind of a regular sound that comes from
oars working in rowlocks when it's a still night.  I peeped out through
the willow branches, and there it was--a skiff, away across the water.
 I couldn't tell how many was in it.  It kept a-coming, and when it was
abreast of me I see there warn't but one man in it.  Think's I, maybe
it's pap, though I warn't expecting him.  He dropped below me with the
current, and by and by he came a-swinging up shore in the easy water,
and he went by so close I could a reached out the gun and touched him.
 Well, it _was_ pap, sure enough--and sober, too, by the way he laid his
oars.

I didn't lose no time.  The next minute I was a-spinning down stream
soft but quick in the shade of the bank.  I made two mile and a half,
and then struck out a quarter of a mile or more towards the middle of
the river, because pretty soon I would be passing the ferry landing, and
people might see me and hail me.  I got out amongst the driftwood, and
then laid down in the bottom of the canoe and let her float.

 I laid there, and had a good rest and a smoke out of my pipe, looking
away into the sky; not a cloud in it.  The sky looks ever so deep when
you lay down on your back in the moonshine; I never knowed it before.
 And how far a body can hear on the water such nights!  I heard people
talking at the ferry landing. I heard what they said, too--every word
of it.  One man said it was getting towards the long days and the short
nights now.  T'other one said _this_ warn't one of the short ones, he
reckoned--and then they laughed, and he said it over again, and they
laughed again; then they waked up another fellow and told him, and
laughed, but he didn't laugh; he ripped out something brisk, and said
let him alone.  The first fellow said he 'lowed to tell it to his
old woman--she would think it was pretty good; but he said that warn't
nothing to some things he had said in his time. I heard one man say it
was nearly three o'clock, and he hoped daylight wouldn't wait more than
about a week longer.  After that the talk got further and further away,
and I couldn't make out the words any more; but I could hear the mumble,
and now and then a laugh, too, but it seemed a long ways off.

I was away below the ferry now.  I rose up, and there was Jackson's
Island, about two mile and a half down stream, heavy timbered and
standing up out of the middle of the river, big and dark and solid, like
a steamboat without any lights.  There warn't any signs of the bar at
the head--it was all under water now.

It didn't take me long to get there.  I shot past the head at a ripping
rate, the current was so swift, and then I got into the dead water and
landed on the side towards the Illinois shore.  I run the canoe into
a deep dent in the bank that I knowed about; I had to part the willow
branches to get in; and when I made fast nobody could a seen the canoe
from the outside.

I went up and set down on a log at the head of the island, and looked
out on the big river and the black driftwood and away over to the town,
three mile away, where there was three or four lights twinkling.  A
monstrous big lumber-raft was about a mile up stream, coming along down,
with a lantern in the middle of it.  I watched it come creeping down,
and when it was most abreast of where I stood I heard a man say, “Stern
oars, there! heave her head to stabboard!”  I heard that just as plain
as if the man was by my side.

There was a little gray in the sky now; so I stepped into the woods, and
laid down for a nap before breakfast.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE sun was up so high when I waked that I judged it was after eight
o'clock.  I laid there in the grass and the cool shade thinking about
things, and feeling rested and ruther comfortable and satisfied.  I
could see the sun out at one or two holes, but mostly it was big trees
all about, and gloomy in there amongst them.  There was freckled places
on the ground where the light sifted down through the leaves, and the
freckled places swapped about a little, showing there was a little
breeze up there.  A couple of squirrels set on a limb and jabbered at me
very friendly.

I was powerful lazy and comfortable--didn't want to get up and cook
breakfast.  Well, I was dozing off again when I thinks I hears a deep
sound of “boom!” away up the river.  I rouses up, and rests on my elbow
and listens; pretty soon I hears it again.  I hopped up, and went and
looked out at a hole in the leaves, and I see a bunch of smoke laying
on the water a long ways up--about abreast the ferry.  And there was the
ferryboat full of people floating along down.  I knowed what was the
matter now.  “Boom!” I see the white smoke squirt out of the ferryboat's
side.  You see, they was firing cannon over the water, trying to make my
carcass come to the top.

I was pretty hungry, but it warn't going to do for me to start a fire,
because they might see the smoke.  So I set there and watched the
cannon-smoke and listened to the boom.  The river was a mile wide there,
and it always looks pretty on a summer morning--so I was having a good
enough time seeing them hunt for my remainders if I only had a bite to
eat. Well, then I happened to think how they always put quicksilver in
loaves of bread and float them off, because they always go right to the
drownded carcass and stop there.  So, says I, I'll keep a lookout, and
if any of them's floating around after me I'll give them a show.  I
changed to the Illinois edge of the island to see what luck I could
have, and I warn't disappointed.  A big double loaf come along, and I
most got it with a long stick, but my foot slipped and she floated out
further.  Of course I was where the current set in the closest to the
shore--I knowed enough for that.  But by and by along comes another one,
and this time I won.  I took out the plug and shook out the little dab
of quicksilver, and set my teeth in.  It was “baker's bread”--what the
quality eat; none of your low-down corn-pone.

I got a good place amongst the leaves, and set there on a log, munching
the bread and watching the ferry-boat, and very well satisfied.  And
then something struck me.  I says, now I reckon the widow or the parson
or somebody prayed that this bread would find me, and here it has gone
and done it.  So there ain't no doubt but there is something in that
thing--that is, there's something in it when a body like the widow or the
parson prays, but it don't work for me, and I reckon it don't work for
only just the right kind.

I lit a pipe and had a good long smoke, and went on watching.  The
ferryboat was floating with the current, and I allowed I'd have a chance
to see who was aboard when she come along, because she would come in
close, where the bread did.  When she'd got pretty well along down
towards me, I put out my pipe and went to where I fished out the bread,
and laid down behind a log on the bank in a little open place.  Where
the log forked I could peep through.

By and by she come along, and she drifted in so close that they could
a run out a plank and walked ashore.  Most everybody was on the boat.
 Pap, and Judge Thatcher, and Bessie Thatcher, and Jo Harper, and Tom
Sawyer, and his old Aunt Polly, and Sid and Mary, and plenty more.
 Everybody was talking about the murder, but the captain broke in and
says:

“Look sharp, now; the current sets in the closest here, and maybe he's
washed ashore and got tangled amongst the brush at the water's edge.  I
hope so, anyway.”

I didn't hope so.  They all crowded up and leaned over the rails, nearly
in my face, and kept still, watching with all their might.  I could see
them first-rate, but they couldn't see me.  Then the captain sung out:

“Stand away!” and the cannon let off such a blast right before me that
it made me deef with the noise and pretty near blind with the smoke, and
I judged I was gone.  If they'd a had some bullets in, I reckon they'd
a got the corpse they was after.  Well, I see I warn't hurt, thanks to
goodness. The boat floated on and went out of sight around the shoulder
of the island.  I could hear the booming now and then, further and
further off, and by and by, after an hour, I didn't hear it no more.
 The island was three mile long.  I judged they had got to the foot, and
was giving it up.  But they didn't yet a while.  They turned around
the foot of the island and started up the channel on the Missouri side,
under steam, and booming once in a while as they went.  I crossed over
to that side and watched them. When they got abreast the head of the
island they quit shooting and dropped over to the Missouri shore and
went home to the town.

I knowed I was all right now.  Nobody else would come a-hunting after
me. I got my traps out of the canoe and made me a nice camp in the thick
woods.  I made a kind of a tent out of my blankets to put my things
under so the rain couldn't get at them.  I catched a catfish and haggled
him open with my saw, and towards sundown I started my camp fire and had
supper.  Then I set out a line to catch some fish for breakfast.

When it was dark I set by my camp fire smoking, and feeling pretty well
satisfied; but by and by it got sort of lonesome, and so I went and set
on the bank and listened to the current swashing along, and counted the
stars and drift logs and rafts that come down, and then went to bed;
there ain't no better way to put in time when you are lonesome; you
can't stay so, you soon get over it.

And so for three days and nights.  No difference--just the same thing.
But the next day I went exploring around down through the island.  I was
boss of it; it all belonged to me, so to say, and I wanted to know
all about it; but mainly I wanted to put in the time.  I found plenty
strawberries, ripe and prime; and green summer grapes, and green
razberries; and the green blackberries was just beginning to show.  They
would all come handy by and by, I judged.

Well, I went fooling along in the deep woods till I judged I warn't
far from the foot of the island.  I had my gun along, but I hadn't shot
nothing; it was for protection; thought I would kill some game nigh
home. About this time I mighty near stepped on a good-sized snake,
and it went sliding off through the grass and flowers, and I after
it, trying to get a shot at it. I clipped along, and all of a sudden I
bounded right on to the ashes of a camp fire that was still smoking.

My heart jumped up amongst my lungs.  I never waited for to look
further, but uncocked my gun and went sneaking back on my tiptoes as
fast as ever I could.  Every now and then I stopped a second amongst the
thick leaves and listened, but my breath come so hard I couldn't hear
nothing else.  I slunk along another piece further, then listened again;
and so on, and so on.  If I see a stump, I took it for a man; if I trod
on a stick and broke it, it made me feel like a person had cut one of my
breaths in two and I only got half, and the short half, too.

When I got to camp I warn't feeling very brash, there warn't much sand
in my craw; but I says, this ain't no time to be fooling around.  So I
got all my traps into my canoe again so as to have them out of sight,
and I put out the fire and scattered the ashes around to look like an
old last year's camp, and then clumb a tree.

I reckon I was up in the tree two hours; but I didn't see nothing,
I didn't hear nothing--I only _thought_ I heard and seen as much as a
thousand things.  Well, I couldn't stay up there forever; so at last I
got down, but I kept in the thick woods and on the lookout all the
time. All I could get to eat was berries and what was left over from
breakfast.

By the time it was night I was pretty hungry.  So when it was good
and dark I slid out from shore before moonrise and paddled over to the
Illinois bank--about a quarter of a mile.  I went out in the woods and
cooked a supper, and I had about made up my mind I would stay there
all night when I hear a _plunkety-plunk, plunkety-plunk_, and says
to myself, horses coming; and next I hear people's voices.  I got
everything into the canoe as quick as I could, and then went creeping
through the woods to see what I could find out.  I hadn't got far when I
hear a man say:

“We better camp here if we can find a good place; the horses is about
beat out.  Let's look around.”

I didn't wait, but shoved out and paddled away easy.  I tied up in the
old place, and reckoned I would sleep in the canoe.

I didn't sleep much.  I couldn't, somehow, for thinking.  And every time
I waked up I thought somebody had me by the neck.  So the sleep didn't
do me no good.  By and by I says to myself, I can't live this way; I'm
a-going to find out who it is that's here on the island with me; I'll
find it out or bust.  Well, I felt better right off.

So I took my paddle and slid out from shore just a step or two, and
then let the canoe drop along down amongst the shadows.  The moon was
shining, and outside of the shadows it made it most as light as day.
 I poked along well on to an hour, everything still as rocks and sound
asleep. Well, by this time I was most down to the foot of the island.  A
little ripply, cool breeze begun to blow, and that was as good as saying
the night was about done.  I give her a turn with the paddle and brung
her nose to shore; then I got my gun and slipped out and into the edge
of the woods.  I sat down there on a log, and looked out through the
leaves.  I see the moon go off watch, and the darkness begin to blanket
the river. But in a little while I see a pale streak over the treetops,
and knowed the day was coming.  So I took my gun and slipped off towards
where I had run across that camp fire, stopping every minute or two
to listen.  But I hadn't no luck somehow; I couldn't seem to find the
place.  But by and by, sure enough, I catched a glimpse of fire away
through the trees.  I went for it, cautious and slow.  By and by I was
close enough to have a look, and there laid a man on the ground.  It
most give me the fan-tods. He had a blanket around his head, and his
head was nearly in the fire.  I set there behind a clump of bushes, in
about six foot of him, and kept my eyes on him steady.  It was getting
gray daylight now.  Pretty soon he gapped and stretched himself and hove
off the blanket, and it was Miss Watson's Jim!  I bet I was glad to see
him.  I says:

“Hello, Jim!” and skipped out.

He bounced up and stared at me wild.  Then he drops down on his knees,
and puts his hands together and says:

“Doan' hurt me--don't!  I hain't ever done no harm to a ghos'.  I alwuz
liked dead people, en done all I could for 'em.  You go en git in de
river agin, whah you b'longs, en doan' do nuffn to Ole Jim, 'at 'uz
awluz yo' fren'.”

Well, I warn't long making him understand I warn't dead.  I was ever so
glad to see Jim.  I warn't lonesome now.  I told him I warn't afraid of
_him_ telling the people where I was.  I talked along, but he only set
there and looked at me; never said nothing.  Then I says:

“It's good daylight.  Le's get breakfast.  Make up your camp fire good.”

“What's de use er makin' up de camp fire to cook strawbries en sich
truck? But you got a gun, hain't you?  Den we kin git sumfn better den
strawbries.”

“Strawberries and such truck,” I says.  “Is that what you live on?”

“I couldn' git nuffn else,” he says.

“Why, how long you been on the island, Jim?”

“I come heah de night arter you's killed.”

“What, all that time?”

“Yes--indeedy.”

“And ain't you had nothing but that kind of rubbage to eat?”

“No, sah--nuffn else.”

“Well, you must be most starved, ain't you?”

“I reck'n I could eat a hoss.  I think I could. How long you ben on de
islan'?”

“Since the night I got killed.”

“No!  W'y, what has you lived on?  But you got a gun.  Oh, yes, you got
a gun.  Dat's good.  Now you kill sumfn en I'll make up de fire.”

So we went over to where the canoe was, and while he built a fire in
a grassy open place amongst the trees, I fetched meal and bacon and
coffee, and coffee-pot and frying-pan, and sugar and tin cups, and the
nigger was set back considerable, because he reckoned it was all done
with witchcraft. I catched a good big catfish, too, and Jim cleaned him
with his knife, and fried him.

When breakfast was ready we lolled on the grass and eat it smoking hot.
Jim laid it in with all his might, for he was most about starved.  Then
when we had got pretty well stuffed, we laid off and lazied.  By and by
Jim says:

“But looky here, Huck, who wuz it dat 'uz killed in dat shanty ef it
warn't you?”

Then I told him the whole thing, and he said it was smart.  He said Tom
Sawyer couldn't get up no better plan than what I had.  Then I says:

“How do you come to be here, Jim, and how'd you get here?”

He looked pretty uneasy, and didn't say nothing for a minute.  Then he
says:

“Maybe I better not tell.”

“Why, Jim?”

“Well, dey's reasons.  But you wouldn' tell on me ef I uz to tell you,
would you, Huck?”

“Blamed if I would, Jim.”

“Well, I b'lieve you, Huck.  I--_I run off_.”

“Jim!”

“But mind, you said you wouldn' tell--you know you said you wouldn' tell,
Huck.”

“Well, I did.  I said I wouldn't, and I'll stick to it.  Honest _injun_,
I will.  People would call me a low-down Abolitionist and despise me for
keeping mum--but that don't make no difference.  I ain't a-going to tell,
and I ain't a-going back there, anyways.  So, now, le's know all about
it.”

“Well, you see, it 'uz dis way.  Ole missus--dat's Miss Watson--she pecks
on me all de time, en treats me pooty rough, but she awluz said she
wouldn' sell me down to Orleans.  But I noticed dey wuz a nigger trader
roun' de place considable lately, en I begin to git oneasy.  Well, one
night I creeps to de do' pooty late, en de do' warn't quite shet, en I
hear old missus tell de widder she gwyne to sell me down to Orleans, but
she didn' want to, but she could git eight hund'd dollars for me, en it
'uz sich a big stack o' money she couldn' resis'.  De widder she try to
git her to say she wouldn' do it, but I never waited to hear de res'.  I
lit out mighty quick, I tell you.

“I tuck out en shin down de hill, en 'spec to steal a skift 'long de
sho' som'ers 'bove de town, but dey wuz people a-stirring yit, so I hid
in de ole tumble-down cooper-shop on de bank to wait for everybody to
go 'way. Well, I wuz dah all night.  Dey wuz somebody roun' all de time.
 'Long 'bout six in de mawnin' skifts begin to go by, en 'bout eight er
nine every skift dat went 'long wuz talkin' 'bout how yo' pap come over
to de town en say you's killed.  Dese las' skifts wuz full o' ladies en
genlmen a-goin' over for to see de place.  Sometimes dey'd pull up at
de sho' en take a res' b'fo' dey started acrost, so by de talk I got to
know all 'bout de killin'.  I 'uz powerful sorry you's killed, Huck, but
I ain't no mo' now.

“I laid dah under de shavin's all day.  I 'uz hungry, but I warn't
afeard; bekase I knowed ole missus en de widder wuz goin' to start to
de camp-meet'n' right arter breakfas' en be gone all day, en dey knows
I goes off wid de cattle 'bout daylight, so dey wouldn' 'spec to see me
roun' de place, en so dey wouldn' miss me tell arter dark in de evenin'.
De yuther servants wouldn' miss me, kase dey'd shin out en take holiday
soon as de ole folks 'uz out'n de way.

“Well, when it come dark I tuck out up de river road, en went 'bout two
mile er more to whah dey warn't no houses.  I'd made up my mine 'bout
what I's agwyne to do.  You see, ef I kep' on tryin' to git away afoot,
de dogs 'ud track me; ef I stole a skift to cross over, dey'd miss dat
skift, you see, en dey'd know 'bout whah I'd lan' on de yuther side, en
whah to pick up my track.  So I says, a raff is what I's arter; it doan'
_make_ no track.

“I see a light a-comin' roun' de p'int bymeby, so I wade' in en shove'
a log ahead o' me en swum more'n half way acrost de river, en got in
'mongst de drift-wood, en kep' my head down low, en kinder swum agin de
current tell de raff come along.  Den I swum to de stern uv it en tuck
a-holt.  It clouded up en 'uz pooty dark for a little while.  So I clumb
up en laid down on de planks.  De men 'uz all 'way yonder in de middle,
whah de lantern wuz.  De river wuz a-risin', en dey wuz a good current;
so I reck'n'd 'at by fo' in de mawnin' I'd be twenty-five mile down de
river, en den I'd slip in jis b'fo' daylight en swim asho', en take to
de woods on de Illinois side.

“But I didn' have no luck.  When we 'uz mos' down to de head er de
islan' a man begin to come aft wid de lantern, I see it warn't no use
fer to wait, so I slid overboard en struck out fer de islan'.  Well, I
had a notion I could lan' mos' anywhers, but I couldn't--bank too bluff.
 I 'uz mos' to de foot er de islan' b'fo' I found' a good place.  I went
into de woods en jedged I wouldn' fool wid raffs no mo', long as dey
move de lantern roun' so.  I had my pipe en a plug er dog-leg, en some
matches in my cap, en dey warn't wet, so I 'uz all right.”

“And so you ain't had no meat nor bread to eat all this time?  Why
didn't you get mud-turkles?”

“How you gwyne to git 'm?  You can't slip up on um en grab um; en how's
a body gwyne to hit um wid a rock?  How could a body do it in de night?
 En I warn't gwyne to show mysef on de bank in de daytime.”

“Well, that's so.  You've had to keep in the woods all the time, of
course. Did you hear 'em shooting the cannon?”

“Oh, yes.  I knowed dey was arter you.  I see um go by heah--watched um
thoo de bushes.”

Some young birds come along, flying a yard or two at a time and
lighting. Jim said it was a sign it was going to rain.  He said it was
a sign when young chickens flew that way, and so he reckoned it was the
same way when young birds done it.  I was going to catch some of them,
but Jim wouldn't let me.  He said it was death.  He said his father laid
mighty sick once, and some of them catched a bird, and his old granny
said his father would die, and he did.

And Jim said you mustn't count the things you are going to cook for
dinner, because that would bring bad luck.  The same if you shook the
table-cloth after sundown.  And he said if a man owned a beehive
and that man died, the bees must be told about it before sun-up next
morning, or else the bees would all weaken down and quit work and die.
 Jim said bees wouldn't sting idiots; but I didn't believe that, because
I had tried them lots of times myself, and they wouldn't sting me.

I had heard about some of these things before, but not all of them.  Jim
knowed all kinds of signs.  He said he knowed most everything.  I said
it looked to me like all the signs was about bad luck, and so I asked
him if there warn't any good-luck signs.  He says:

“Mighty few--an' _dey_ ain't no use to a body.  What you want to know
when good luck's a-comin' for?  Want to keep it off?”  And he said:  “Ef
you's got hairy arms en a hairy breas', it's a sign dat you's agwyne
to be rich. Well, dey's some use in a sign like dat, 'kase it's so fur
ahead. You see, maybe you's got to be po' a long time fust, en so you
might git discourage' en kill yo'sef 'f you didn' know by de sign dat
you gwyne to be rich bymeby.”

“Have you got hairy arms and a hairy breast, Jim?”

“What's de use to ax dat question?  Don't you see I has?”

“Well, are you rich?”

“No, but I ben rich wunst, and gwyne to be rich agin.  Wunst I had
foteen dollars, but I tuck to specalat'n', en got busted out.”

“What did you speculate in, Jim?”

“Well, fust I tackled stock.”

“What kind of stock?”

“Why, live stock--cattle, you know.  I put ten dollars in a cow.  But
I ain' gwyne to resk no mo' money in stock.  De cow up 'n' died on my
han's.”

“So you lost the ten dollars.”

“No, I didn't lose it all.  I on'y los' 'bout nine of it.  I sole de
hide en taller for a dollar en ten cents.”

“You had five dollars and ten cents left.  Did you speculate any more?”

“Yes.  You know that one-laigged nigger dat b'longs to old Misto
Bradish? Well, he sot up a bank, en say anybody dat put in a dollar
would git fo' dollars mo' at de en' er de year.  Well, all de niggers
went in, but dey didn't have much.  I wuz de on'y one dat had much.  So
I stuck out for mo' dan fo' dollars, en I said 'f I didn' git it I'd
start a bank mysef. Well, o' course dat nigger want' to keep me out er
de business, bekase he says dey warn't business 'nough for two banks, so
he say I could put in my five dollars en he pay me thirty-five at de en'
er de year.

“So I done it.  Den I reck'n'd I'd inves' de thirty-five dollars right
off en keep things a-movin'.  Dey wuz a nigger name' Bob, dat had
ketched a wood-flat, en his marster didn' know it; en I bought it off'n
him en told him to take de thirty-five dollars when de en' er de
year come; but somebody stole de wood-flat dat night, en nex day de
one-laigged nigger say de bank's busted.  So dey didn' none uv us git no
money.”

“What did you do with the ten cents, Jim?”

“Well, I 'uz gwyne to spen' it, but I had a dream, en de dream tole me
to give it to a nigger name' Balum--Balum's Ass dey call him for short;
he's one er dem chuckleheads, you know.  But he's lucky, dey say, en I
see I warn't lucky.  De dream say let Balum inves' de ten cents en he'd
make a raise for me.  Well, Balum he tuck de money, en when he wuz in
church he hear de preacher say dat whoever give to de po' len' to de
Lord, en boun' to git his money back a hund'd times.  So Balum he tuck
en give de ten cents to de po', en laid low to see what wuz gwyne to
come of it.”

“Well, what did come of it, Jim?”

“Nuffn never come of it.  I couldn' manage to k'leck dat money no way;
en Balum he couldn'.  I ain' gwyne to len' no mo' money 'dout I see de
security.  Boun' to git yo' money back a hund'd times, de preacher says!
Ef I could git de ten _cents_ back, I'd call it squah, en be glad er de
chanst.”

“Well, it's all right anyway, Jim, long as you're going to be rich again
some time or other.”

“Yes; en I's rich now, come to look at it.  I owns mysef, en I's wuth
eight hund'd dollars.  I wisht I had de money, I wouldn' want no mo'.”




CHAPTER IX.

I wanted to go and look at a place right about the middle of the island
that I'd found when I was exploring; so we started and soon got to it,
because the island was only three miles long and a quarter of a mile
wide.

This place was a tolerable long, steep hill or ridge about forty foot
high. We had a rough time getting to the top, the sides was so steep and
the bushes so thick.  We tramped and clumb around all over it, and by
and by found a good big cavern in the rock, most up to the top on the
side towards Illinois.  The cavern was as big as two or three rooms
bunched together, and Jim could stand up straight in it.  It was cool in
there. Jim was for putting our traps in there right away, but I said we
didn't want to be climbing up and down there all the time.

Jim said if we had the canoe hid in a good place, and had all the traps
in the cavern, we could rush there if anybody was to come to the island,
and they would never find us without dogs.  And, besides, he said them
little birds had said it was going to rain, and did I want the things to
get wet?

So we went back and got the canoe, and paddled up abreast the cavern,
and lugged all the traps up there.  Then we hunted up a place close by
to hide the canoe in, amongst the thick willows.  We took some fish off
of the lines and set them again, and begun to get ready for dinner.

The door of the cavern was big enough to roll a hogshead in, and on one
side of the door the floor stuck out a little bit, and was flat and a
good place to build a fire on.  So we built it there and cooked dinner.

We spread the blankets inside for a carpet, and eat our dinner in there.
We put all the other things handy at the back of the cavern.  Pretty
soon it darkened up, and begun to thunder and lighten; so the birds was
right about it.  Directly it begun to rain, and it rained like all fury,
too, and I never see the wind blow so.  It was one of these regular
summer storms.  It would get so dark that it looked all blue-black
outside, and lovely; and the rain would thrash along by so thick that
the trees off a little ways looked dim and spider-webby; and here would
come a blast of wind that would bend the trees down and turn up the
pale underside of the leaves; and then a perfect ripper of a gust would
follow along and set the branches to tossing their arms as if they
was just wild; and next, when it was just about the bluest and
blackest--_FST_! it was as bright as glory, and you'd have a little
glimpse of tree-tops a-plunging about away off yonder in the storm,
hundreds of yards further than you could see before; dark as sin again
in a second, and now you'd hear the thunder let go with an awful crash,
and then go rumbling, grumbling, tumbling, down the sky towards the
under side of the world, like rolling empty barrels down stairs--where
it's long stairs and they bounce a good deal, you know.

“Jim, this is nice,” I says.  “I wouldn't want to be nowhere else but
here. Pass me along another hunk of fish and some hot corn-bread.”

“Well, you wouldn't a ben here 'f it hadn't a ben for Jim.  You'd a ben
down dah in de woods widout any dinner, en gittn' mos' drownded, too;
dat you would, honey.  Chickens knows when it's gwyne to rain, en so do
de birds, chile.”

The river went on raising and raising for ten or twelve days, till at
last it was over the banks.  The water was three or four foot deep on
the island in the low places and on the Illinois bottom.  On that side
it was a good many miles wide, but on the Missouri side it was the same
old distance across--a half a mile--because the Missouri shore was just a
wall of high bluffs.

Daytimes we paddled all over the island in the canoe, It was mighty cool
and shady in the deep woods, even if the sun was blazing outside.  We
went winding in and out amongst the trees, and sometimes the vines hung
so thick we had to back away and go some other way.  Well, on every old
broken-down tree you could see rabbits and snakes and such things; and
when the island had been overflowed a day or two they got so tame, on
account of being hungry, that you could paddle right up and put your
hand on them if you wanted to; but not the snakes and turtles--they would
slide off in the water.  The ridge our cavern was in was full of them.
We could a had pets enough if we'd wanted them.

One night we catched a little section of a lumber raft--nice pine planks.
It was twelve foot wide and about fifteen or sixteen foot long, and
the top stood above water six or seven inches--a solid, level floor.  We
could see saw-logs go by in the daylight sometimes, but we let them go;
we didn't show ourselves in daylight.

Another night when we was up at the head of the island, just before
daylight, here comes a frame-house down, on the west side.  She was
a two-story, and tilted over considerable.  We paddled out and got
aboard--clumb in at an upstairs window.  But it was too dark to see yet,
so we made the canoe fast and set in her to wait for daylight.

The light begun to come before we got to the foot of the island.  Then
we looked in at the window.  We could make out a bed, and a table, and
two old chairs, and lots of things around about on the floor, and there
was clothes hanging against the wall.  There was something laying on the
floor in the far corner that looked like a man.  So Jim says:

“Hello, you!”

But it didn't budge.  So I hollered again, and then Jim says:

“De man ain't asleep--he's dead.  You hold still--I'll go en see.”

He went, and bent down and looked, and says:

“It's a dead man.  Yes, indeedy; naked, too.  He's ben shot in de back.
I reck'n he's ben dead two er three days.  Come in, Huck, but doan' look
at his face--it's too gashly.”

I didn't look at him at all.  Jim throwed some old rags over him, but
he needn't done it; I didn't want to see him.  There was heaps of old
greasy cards scattered around over the floor, and old whisky bottles,
and a couple of masks made out of black cloth; and all over the walls
was the ignorantest kind of words and pictures made with charcoal.
 There was two old dirty calico dresses, and a sun-bonnet, and some
women's underclothes hanging against the wall, and some men's clothing,
too.  We put the lot into the canoe--it might come good.  There was a
boy's old speckled straw hat on the floor; I took that, too.  And there
was a bottle that had had milk in it, and it had a rag stopper for a
baby to suck.  We would a took the bottle, but it was broke.  There was
a seedy old chest, and an old hair trunk with the hinges broke.  They
stood open, but there warn't nothing left in them that was any account.
 The way things was scattered about we reckoned the people left in a
hurry, and warn't fixed so as to carry off most of their stuff.

We got an old tin lantern, and a butcher-knife without any handle, and
a bran-new Barlow knife worth two bits in any store, and a lot of tallow
candles, and a tin candlestick, and a gourd, and a tin cup, and a ratty
old bedquilt off the bed, and a reticule with needles and pins and
beeswax and buttons and thread and all such truck in it, and a hatchet
and some nails, and a fishline as thick as my little finger with some
monstrous hooks on it, and a roll of buckskin, and a leather dog-collar,
and a horseshoe, and some vials of medicine that didn't have no label
on them; and just as we was leaving I found a tolerable good curry-comb,
and Jim he found a ratty old fiddle-bow, and a wooden leg.  The straps
was broke off of it, but, barring that, it was a good enough leg, though
it was too long for me and not long enough for Jim, and we couldn't find
the other one, though we hunted all around.

And so, take it all around, we made a good haul.  When we was ready to
shove off we was a quarter of a mile below the island, and it was pretty
broad day; so I made Jim lay down in the canoe and cover up with the
quilt, because if he set up people could tell he was a nigger a good
ways off.  I paddled over to the Illinois shore, and drifted down most
a half a mile doing it.  I crept up the dead water under the bank, and
hadn't no accidents and didn't see nobody.  We got home all safe.




CHAPTER X.

AFTER breakfast I wanted to talk about the dead man and guess out how he
come to be killed, but Jim didn't want to.  He said it would fetch bad
luck; and besides, he said, he might come and ha'nt us; he said a man
that warn't buried was more likely to go a-ha'nting around than one
that was planted and comfortable.  That sounded pretty reasonable, so
I didn't say no more; but I couldn't keep from studying over it and
wishing I knowed who shot the man, and what they done it for.

We rummaged the clothes we'd got, and found eight dollars in silver
sewed up in the lining of an old blanket overcoat.  Jim said he reckoned
the people in that house stole the coat, because if they'd a knowed the
money was there they wouldn't a left it.  I said I reckoned they killed
him, too; but Jim didn't want to talk about that.  I says:

“Now you think it's bad luck; but what did you say when I fetched in the
snake-skin that I found on the top of the ridge day before yesterday?
You said it was the worst bad luck in the world to touch a snake-skin
with my hands.  Well, here's your bad luck!  We've raked in all this
truck and eight dollars besides.  I wish we could have some bad luck
like this every day, Jim.”

“Never you mind, honey, never you mind.  Don't you git too peart.  It's
a-comin'.  Mind I tell you, it's a-comin'.”

It did come, too.  It was a Tuesday that we had that talk.  Well, after
dinner Friday we was laying around in the grass at the upper end of the
ridge, and got out of tobacco.  I went to the cavern to get some, and
found a rattlesnake in there.  I killed him, and curled him up on the
foot of Jim's blanket, ever so natural, thinking there'd be some fun
when Jim found him there.  Well, by night I forgot all about the snake,
and when Jim flung himself down on the blanket while I struck a light
the snake's mate was there, and bit him.

He jumped up yelling, and the first thing the light showed was the
varmint curled up and ready for another spring.  I laid him out in a
second with a stick, and Jim grabbed pap's whisky-jug and begun to pour
it down.

He was barefooted, and the snake bit him right on the heel.  That all
comes of my being such a fool as to not remember that wherever you leave
a dead snake its mate always comes there and curls around it.  Jim told
me to chop off the snake's head and throw it away, and then skin the
body and roast a piece of it.  I done it, and he eat it and said it
would help cure him. He made me take off the rattles and tie them around
his wrist, too.  He said that that would help.  Then I slid out quiet
and throwed the snakes clear away amongst the bushes; for I warn't going
to let Jim find out it was all my fault, not if I could help it.

Jim sucked and sucked at the jug, and now and then he got out of his
head and pitched around and yelled; but every time he come to himself he
went to sucking at the jug again.  His foot swelled up pretty big, and
so did his leg; but by and by the drunk begun to come, and so I judged
he was all right; but I'd druther been bit with a snake than pap's
whisky.

Jim was laid up for four days and nights.  Then the swelling was all
gone and he was around again.  I made up my mind I wouldn't ever take
a-holt of a snake-skin again with my hands, now that I see what had come
of it. Jim said he reckoned I would believe him next time.  And he said
that handling a snake-skin was such awful bad luck that maybe we hadn't
got to the end of it yet.  He said he druther see the new moon over his
left shoulder as much as a thousand times than take up a snake-skin
in his hand.  Well, I was getting to feel that way myself, though I've
always reckoned that looking at the new moon over your left shoulder is
one of the carelessest and foolishest things a body can do.  Old Hank
Bunker done it once, and bragged about it; and in less than two years he
got drunk and fell off of the shot-tower, and spread himself out so
that he was just a kind of a layer, as you may say; and they slid him
edgeways between two barn doors for a coffin, and buried him so, so
they say, but I didn't see it.  Pap told me.  But anyway it all come of
looking at the moon that way, like a fool.

Well, the days went along, and the river went down between its banks
again; and about the first thing we done was to bait one of the big
hooks with a skinned rabbit and set it and catch a catfish that was
as big as a man, being six foot two inches long, and weighed over two
hundred pounds. We couldn't handle him, of course; he would a flung us
into Illinois.  We just set there and watched him rip and tear around
till he drownded.  We found a brass button in his stomach and a round
ball, and lots of rubbage.  We split the ball open with the hatchet,
and there was a spool in it.  Jim said he'd had it there a long time, to
coat it over so and make a ball of it.  It was as big a fish as was ever
catched in the Mississippi, I reckon.  Jim said he hadn't ever seen
a bigger one.  He would a been worth a good deal over at the village.
 They peddle out such a fish as that by the pound in the market-house
there; everybody buys some of him; his meat's as white as snow and makes
a good fry.

Next morning I said it was getting slow and dull, and I wanted to get a
stirring up some way.  I said I reckoned I would slip over the river and
find out what was going on.  Jim liked that notion; but he said I
must go in the dark and look sharp.  Then he studied it over and said,
couldn't I put on some of them old things and dress up like a girl?
 That was a good notion, too.  So we shortened up one of the calico
gowns, and I turned up my trouser-legs to my knees and got into it.  Jim
hitched it behind with the hooks, and it was a fair fit.  I put on the
sun-bonnet and tied it under my chin, and then for a body to look in
and see my face was like looking down a joint of stove-pipe.  Jim said
nobody would know me, even in the daytime, hardly.  I practiced around
all day to get the hang of the things, and by and by I could do pretty
well in them, only Jim said I didn't walk like a girl; and he said
I must quit pulling up my gown to get at my britches-pocket.  I took
notice, and done better.

I started up the Illinois shore in the canoe just after dark.

I started across to the town from a little below the ferry-landing, and
the drift of the current fetched me in at the bottom of the town.  I
tied up and started along the bank.  There was a light burning in a
little shanty that hadn't been lived in for a long time, and I wondered
who had took up quarters there.  I slipped up and peeped in at the
window.  There was a woman about forty year old in there knitting by
a candle that was on a pine table.  I didn't know her face; she was a
stranger, for you couldn't start a face in that town that I didn't know.
 Now this was lucky, because I was weakening; I was getting afraid I had
come; people might know my voice and find me out.  But if this woman had
been in such a little town two days she could tell me all I wanted to
know; so I knocked at the door, and made up my mind I wouldn't forget I
was a girl.




CHAPTER XI.

“COME in,” says the woman, and I did.  She says:  “Take a cheer.”

I done it.  She looked me all over with her little shiny eyes, and says:

“What might your name be?”

“Sarah Williams.”

“Where 'bouts do you live?  In this neighborhood?'

“No'm.  In Hookerville, seven mile below.  I've walked all the way and
I'm all tired out.”

“Hungry, too, I reckon.  I'll find you something.”

“No'm, I ain't hungry.  I was so hungry I had to stop two miles below
here at a farm; so I ain't hungry no more.  It's what makes me so late.
My mother's down sick, and out of money and everything, and I come to
tell my uncle Abner Moore.  He lives at the upper end of the town, she
says.  I hain't ever been here before.  Do you know him?”

“No; but I don't know everybody yet.  I haven't lived here quite two
weeks. It's a considerable ways to the upper end of the town.  You
better stay here all night.  Take off your bonnet.”

“No,” I says; “I'll rest a while, I reckon, and go on.  I ain't afeared
of the dark.”

She said she wouldn't let me go by myself, but her husband would be in
by and by, maybe in a hour and a half, and she'd send him along with me.
Then she got to talking about her husband, and about her relations up
the river, and her relations down the river, and about how much better
off they used to was, and how they didn't know but they'd made a mistake
coming to our town, instead of letting well alone--and so on and so on,
till I was afeard I had made a mistake coming to her to find out what
was going on in the town; but by and by she dropped on to pap and the
murder, and then I was pretty willing to let her clatter right along.
 She told about me and Tom Sawyer finding the six thousand dollars (only
she got it ten) and all about pap and what a hard lot he was, and what
a hard lot I was, and at last she got down to where I was murdered.  I
says:

“Who done it?  We've heard considerable about these goings on down in
Hookerville, but we don't know who 'twas that killed Huck Finn.”

“Well, I reckon there's a right smart chance of people _here_ that'd
like to know who killed him.  Some think old Finn done it himself.”

“No--is that so?”

“Most everybody thought it at first.  He'll never know how nigh he come
to getting lynched.  But before night they changed around and judged it
was done by a runaway nigger named Jim.”

“Why _he_--”

I stopped.  I reckoned I better keep still.  She run on, and never
noticed I had put in at all:

“The nigger run off the very night Huck Finn was killed.  So there's a
reward out for him--three hundred dollars.  And there's a reward out for
old Finn, too--two hundred dollars.  You see, he come to town the
morning after the murder, and told about it, and was out with 'em on the
ferryboat hunt, and right away after he up and left.  Before night they
wanted to lynch him, but he was gone, you see.  Well, next day they
found out the nigger was gone; they found out he hadn't ben seen sence
ten o'clock the night the murder was done.  So then they put it on him,
you see; and while they was full of it, next day, back comes old Finn,
and went boo-hooing to Judge Thatcher to get money to hunt for the
nigger all over Illinois with. The judge gave him some, and that evening
he got drunk, and was around till after midnight with a couple of mighty
hard-looking strangers, and then went off with them.  Well, he hain't
come back sence, and they ain't looking for him back till this thing
blows over a little, for people thinks now that he killed his boy and
fixed things so folks would think robbers done it, and then he'd get
Huck's money without having to bother a long time with a lawsuit.
 People do say he warn't any too good to do it.  Oh, he's sly, I reckon.
 If he don't come back for a year he'll be all right.  You can't prove
anything on him, you know; everything will be quieted down then, and
he'll walk in Huck's money as easy as nothing.”

“Yes, I reckon so, 'm.  I don't see nothing in the way of it.  Has
everybody quit thinking the nigger done it?”

“Oh, no, not everybody.  A good many thinks he done it.  But they'll get
the nigger pretty soon now, and maybe they can scare it out of him.”

“Why, are they after him yet?”

“Well, you're innocent, ain't you!  Does three hundred dollars lay
around every day for people to pick up?  Some folks think the nigger
ain't far from here.  I'm one of them--but I hain't talked it around.  A
few days ago I was talking with an old couple that lives next door in
the log shanty, and they happened to say hardly anybody ever goes to
that island over yonder that they call Jackson's Island.  Don't anybody
live there? says I. No, nobody, says they.  I didn't say any more, but
I done some thinking.  I was pretty near certain I'd seen smoke over
there, about the head of the island, a day or two before that, so I says
to myself, like as not that nigger's hiding over there; anyway, says
I, it's worth the trouble to give the place a hunt.  I hain't seen any
smoke sence, so I reckon maybe he's gone, if it was him; but husband's
going over to see--him and another man.  He was gone up the river; but he
got back to-day, and I told him as soon as he got here two hours ago.”

I had got so uneasy I couldn't set still.  I had to do something with my
hands; so I took up a needle off of the table and went to threading
it. My hands shook, and I was making a bad job of it.  When the woman
stopped talking I looked up, and she was looking at me pretty curious
and smiling a little.  I put down the needle and thread, and let on to
be interested--and I was, too--and says:

“Three hundred dollars is a power of money.  I wish my mother could get
it. Is your husband going over there to-night?”

“Oh, yes.  He went up-town with the man I was telling you of, to get a
boat and see if they could borrow another gun.  They'll go over after
midnight.”

“Couldn't they see better if they was to wait till daytime?”

“Yes.  And couldn't the nigger see better, too?  After midnight he'll
likely be asleep, and they can slip around through the woods and hunt up
his camp fire all the better for the dark, if he's got one.”

“I didn't think of that.”

The woman kept looking at me pretty curious, and I didn't feel a bit
comfortable.  Pretty soon she says,

“What did you say your name was, honey?”

“M--Mary Williams.”

Somehow it didn't seem to me that I said it was Mary before, so I didn't
look up--seemed to me I said it was Sarah; so I felt sort of cornered,
and was afeared maybe I was looking it, too.  I wished the woman would
say something more; the longer she set still the uneasier I was.  But
now she says:

“Honey, I thought you said it was Sarah when you first come in?”

“Oh, yes'm, I did.  Sarah Mary Williams.  Sarah's my first name.  Some
calls me Sarah, some calls me Mary.”

“Oh, that's the way of it?”

“Yes'm.”

I was feeling better then, but I wished I was out of there, anyway.  I
couldn't look up yet.

Well, the woman fell to talking about how hard times was, and how poor
they had to live, and how the rats was as free as if they owned the
place, and so forth and so on, and then I got easy again.  She was right
about the rats. You'd see one stick his nose out of a hole in the corner
every little while.  She said she had to have things handy to throw at
them when she was alone, or they wouldn't give her no peace.  She showed
me a bar of lead twisted up into a knot, and said she was a good shot
with it generly, but she'd wrenched her arm a day or two ago, and didn't
know whether she could throw true now.  But she watched for a chance,
and directly banged away at a rat; but she missed him wide, and said
“Ouch!” it hurt her arm so.  Then she told me to try for the next one.
 I wanted to be getting away before the old man got back, but of course
I didn't let on.  I got the thing, and the first rat that showed his
nose I let drive, and if he'd a stayed where he was he'd a been a
tolerable sick rat.  She said that was first-rate, and she reckoned I
would hive the next one.  She went and got the lump of lead and fetched
it back, and brought along a hank of yarn which she wanted me to help
her with.  I held up my two hands and she put the hank over them, and
went on talking about her and her husband's matters.  But she broke off
to say:

“Keep your eye on the rats.  You better have the lead in your lap,
handy.”

So she dropped the lump into my lap just at that moment, and I clapped
my legs together on it and she went on talking.  But only about a
minute. Then she took off the hank and looked me straight in the face,
and very pleasant, and says:

“Come, now, what's your real name?”

“Wh--what, mum?”

“What's your real name?  Is it Bill, or Tom, or Bob?--or what is it?”

I reckon I shook like a leaf, and I didn't know hardly what to do.  But
I says:

“Please to don't poke fun at a poor girl like me, mum.  If I'm in the
way here, I'll--”

“No, you won't.  Set down and stay where you are.  I ain't going to hurt
you, and I ain't going to tell on you, nuther.  You just tell me your
secret, and trust me.  I'll keep it; and, what's more, I'll help
you. So'll my old man if you want him to.  You see, you're a runaway
'prentice, that's all.  It ain't anything.  There ain't no harm in it.
You've been treated bad, and you made up your mind to cut.  Bless you,
child, I wouldn't tell on you.  Tell me all about it now, that's a good
boy.”

So I said it wouldn't be no use to try to play it any longer, and I
would just make a clean breast and tell her everything, but she musn't
go back on her promise.  Then I told her my father and mother was dead,
and the law had bound me out to a mean old farmer in the country thirty
mile back from the river, and he treated me so bad I couldn't stand it
no longer; he went away to be gone a couple of days, and so I took my
chance and stole some of his daughter's old clothes and cleared out, and
I had been three nights coming the thirty miles.  I traveled nights,
and hid daytimes and slept, and the bag of bread and meat I carried from
home lasted me all the way, and I had a-plenty.  I said I believed my
uncle Abner Moore would take care of me, and so that was why I struck
out for this town of Goshen.

“Goshen, child?  This ain't Goshen.  This is St. Petersburg.  Goshen's
ten mile further up the river.  Who told you this was Goshen?”

“Why, a man I met at daybreak this morning, just as I was going to turn
into the woods for my regular sleep.  He told me when the roads forked I
must take the right hand, and five mile would fetch me to Goshen.”

“He was drunk, I reckon.  He told you just exactly wrong.”

“Well, he did act like he was drunk, but it ain't no matter now.  I got
to be moving along.  I'll fetch Goshen before daylight.”

“Hold on a minute.  I'll put you up a snack to eat.  You might want it.”

So she put me up a snack, and says:

“Say, when a cow's laying down, which end of her gets up first?  Answer
up prompt now--don't stop to study over it.  Which end gets up first?”

“The hind end, mum.”

“Well, then, a horse?”

“The for'rard end, mum.”

“Which side of a tree does the moss grow on?”

“North side.”

“If fifteen cows is browsing on a hillside, how many of them eats with
their heads pointed the same direction?”

“The whole fifteen, mum.”

“Well, I reckon you _have_ lived in the country.  I thought maybe you
was trying to hocus me again.  What's your real name, now?”

“George Peters, mum.”

“Well, try to remember it, George.  Don't forget and tell me it's
Elexander before you go, and then get out by saying it's George
Elexander when I catch you.  And don't go about women in that old
calico.  You do a girl tolerable poor, but you might fool men, maybe.
 Bless you, child, when you set out to thread a needle don't hold the
thread still and fetch the needle up to it; hold the needle still and
poke the thread at it; that's the way a woman most always does, but a
man always does t'other way.  And when you throw at a rat or anything,
hitch yourself up a tiptoe and fetch your hand up over your head as
awkward as you can, and miss your rat about six or seven foot. Throw
stiff-armed from the shoulder, like there was a pivot there for it to
turn on, like a girl; not from the wrist and elbow, with your arm out
to one side, like a boy.  And, mind you, when a girl tries to catch
anything in her lap she throws her knees apart; she don't clap them
together, the way you did when you catched the lump of lead.  Why, I
spotted you for a boy when you was threading the needle; and I contrived
the other things just to make certain.  Now trot along to your uncle,
Sarah Mary Williams George Elexander Peters, and if you get into trouble
you send word to Mrs. Judith Loftus, which is me, and I'll do what I can
to get you out of it.  Keep the river road all the way, and next time
you tramp take shoes and socks with you. The river road's a rocky one,
and your feet'll be in a condition when you get to Goshen, I reckon.”

I went up the bank about fifty yards, and then I doubled on my tracks
and slipped back to where my canoe was, a good piece below the house.  I
jumped in, and was off in a hurry.  I went up-stream far enough to
make the head of the island, and then started across.  I took off the
sun-bonnet, for I didn't want no blinders on then.  When I was about the
middle I heard the clock begin to strike, so I stops and listens; the
sound come faint over the water but clear--eleven.  When I struck the
head of the island I never waited to blow, though I was most winded, but
I shoved right into the timber where my old camp used to be, and started
a good fire there on a high and dry spot.

Then I jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place, a mile and a half
below, as hard as I could go.  I landed, and slopped through the timber
and up the ridge and into the cavern.  There Jim laid, sound asleep on
the ground.  I roused him out and says:

“Git up and hump yourself, Jim!  There ain't a minute to lose.  They're
after us!”

Jim never asked no questions, he never said a word; but the way he
worked for the next half an hour showed about how he was scared.  By
that time everything we had in the world was on our raft, and she was
ready to be shoved out from the willow cove where she was hid.  We
put out the camp fire at the cavern the first thing, and didn't show a
candle outside after that.

I took the canoe out from the shore a little piece, and took a look;
but if there was a boat around I couldn't see it, for stars and shadows
ain't good to see by.  Then we got out the raft and slipped along down
in the shade, past the foot of the island dead still--never saying a
word.




CHAPTER XII.

IT must a been close on to one o'clock when we got below the island at
last, and the raft did seem to go mighty slow.  If a boat was to come
along we was going to take to the canoe and break for the Illinois
shore; and it was well a boat didn't come, for we hadn't ever thought to
put the gun in the canoe, or a fishing-line, or anything to eat.  We
was in ruther too much of a sweat to think of so many things.  It warn't
good judgment to put _everything_ on the raft.

If the men went to the island I just expect they found the camp fire I
built, and watched it all night for Jim to come.  Anyways, they stayed
away from us, and if my building the fire never fooled them it warn't no
fault of mine.  I played it as low down on them as I could.

When the first streak of day began to show we tied up to a towhead in a
big bend on the Illinois side, and hacked off cottonwood branches with
the hatchet, and covered up the raft with them so she looked like there
had been a cave-in in the bank there.  A tow-head is a sandbar that has
cottonwoods on it as thick as harrow-teeth.

We had mountains on the Missouri shore and heavy timber on the Illinois
side, and the channel was down the Missouri shore at that place, so we
warn't afraid of anybody running across us.  We laid there all day,
and watched the rafts and steamboats spin down the Missouri shore, and
up-bound steamboats fight the big river in the middle.  I told Jim all
about the time I had jabbering with that woman; and Jim said she was
a smart one, and if she was to start after us herself she wouldn't set
down and watch a camp fire--no, sir, she'd fetch a dog.  Well, then, I
said, why couldn't she tell her husband to fetch a dog?  Jim said he
bet she did think of it by the time the men was ready to start, and he
believed they must a gone up-town to get a dog and so they lost all that
time, or else we wouldn't be here on a towhead sixteen or seventeen mile
below the village--no, indeedy, we would be in that same old town again.
 So I said I didn't care what was the reason they didn't get us as long
as they didn't.

When it was beginning to come on dark we poked our heads out of the
cottonwood thicket, and looked up and down and across; nothing in sight;
so Jim took up some of the top planks of the raft and built a snug
wigwam to get under in blazing weather and rainy, and to keep the things
dry. Jim made a floor for the wigwam, and raised it a foot or more above
the level of the raft, so now the blankets and all the traps was out of
reach of steamboat waves.  Right in the middle of the wigwam we made a
layer of dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame around it for
to hold it to its place; this was to build a fire on in sloppy weather
or chilly; the wigwam would keep it from being seen.  We made an extra
steering-oar, too, because one of the others might get broke on a snag
or something. We fixed up a short forked stick to hang the old lantern
on, because we must always light the lantern whenever we see a steamboat
coming down-stream, to keep from getting run over; but we wouldn't have
to light it for up-stream boats unless we see we was in what they call
a “crossing”; for the river was pretty high yet, very low banks being
still a little under water; so up-bound boats didn't always run the
channel, but hunted easy water.

This second night we run between seven and eight hours, with a current
that was making over four mile an hour.  We catched fish and talked,
and we took a swim now and then to keep off sleepiness.  It was kind of
solemn, drifting down the big, still river, laying on our backs looking
up at the stars, and we didn't ever feel like talking loud, and it
warn't often that we laughed--only a little kind of a low chuckle.  We
had mighty good weather as a general thing, and nothing ever happened to
us at all--that night, nor the next, nor the next.

Every night we passed towns, some of them away up on black hillsides,
nothing but just a shiny bed of lights; not a house could you see.  The
fifth night we passed St. Louis, and it was like the whole world lit up.
In St. Petersburg they used to say there was twenty or thirty thousand
people in St. Louis, but I never believed it till I see that wonderful
spread of lights at two o'clock that still night.  There warn't a sound
there; everybody was asleep.

Every night now I used to slip ashore towards ten o'clock at some little
village, and buy ten or fifteen cents' worth of meal or bacon or other
stuff to eat; and sometimes I lifted a chicken that warn't roosting
comfortable, and took him along.  Pap always said, take a chicken when
you get a chance, because if you don't want him yourself you can easy
find somebody that does, and a good deed ain't ever forgot.  I never see
pap when he didn't want the chicken himself, but that is what he used to
say, anyway.

Mornings before daylight I slipped into cornfields and borrowed a
watermelon, or a mushmelon, or a punkin, or some new corn, or things of
that kind.  Pap always said it warn't no harm to borrow things if you
was meaning to pay them back some time; but the widow said it warn't
anything but a soft name for stealing, and no decent body would do it.
 Jim said he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly
right; so the best way would be for us to pick out two or three things
from the list and say we wouldn't borrow them any more--then he reckoned
it wouldn't be no harm to borrow the others.  So we talked it over all
one night, drifting along down the river, trying to make up our minds
whether to drop the watermelons, or the cantelopes, or the mushmelons,
or what.  But towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory, and
concluded to drop crabapples and p'simmons.  We warn't feeling just
right before that, but it was all comfortable now.  I was glad the way
it come out, too, because crabapples ain't ever good, and the p'simmons
wouldn't be ripe for two or three months yet.

We shot a water-fowl now and then that got up too early in the morning
or didn't go to bed early enough in the evening.  Take it all round, we
lived pretty high.

The fifth night below St. Louis we had a big storm after midnight, with
a power of thunder and lightning, and the rain poured down in a solid
sheet. We stayed in the wigwam and let the raft take care of itself.
When the lightning glared out we could see a big straight river ahead,
and high, rocky bluffs on both sides.  By and by says I, “Hel-_lo_, Jim,
looky yonder!” It was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock.
 We was drifting straight down for her.  The lightning showed her very
distinct.  She was leaning over, with part of her upper deck above
water, and you could see every little chimbly-guy clean and clear, and a
chair by the big bell, with an old slouch hat hanging on the back of it,
when the flashes come.

Well, it being away in the night and stormy, and all so mysterious-like,
I felt just the way any other boy would a felt when I see that wreck
laying there so mournful and lonesome in the middle of the river.  I
wanted to get aboard of her and slink around a little, and see what
there was there.  So I says:

“Le's land on her, Jim.”

But Jim was dead against it at first.  He says:

“I doan' want to go fool'n 'long er no wrack.  We's doin' blame' well,
en we better let blame' well alone, as de good book says.  Like as not
dey's a watchman on dat wrack.”

“Watchman your grandmother,” I says; “there ain't nothing to watch but
the texas and the pilot-house; and do you reckon anybody's going to resk
his life for a texas and a pilot-house such a night as this, when
it's likely to break up and wash off down the river any minute?”  Jim
couldn't say nothing to that, so he didn't try.  “And besides,” I says,
“we might borrow something worth having out of the captain's stateroom.
 Seegars, I bet you--and cost five cents apiece, solid cash.  Steamboat
captains is always rich, and get sixty dollars a month, and _they_ don't
care a cent what a thing costs, you know, long as they want it.  Stick a
candle in your pocket; I can't rest, Jim, till we give her a rummaging.
 Do you reckon Tom Sawyer would ever go by this thing?  Not for pie, he
wouldn't. He'd call it an adventure--that's what he'd call it; and he'd
land on that wreck if it was his last act.  And wouldn't he throw style
into it?--wouldn't he spread himself, nor nothing?  Why, you'd think it
was Christopher C'lumbus discovering Kingdom-Come.  I wish Tom Sawyer
_was_ here.”

Jim he grumbled a little, but give in.  He said we mustn't talk any more
than we could help, and then talk mighty low.  The lightning showed us
the wreck again just in time, and we fetched the stabboard derrick, and
made fast there.

The deck was high out here.  We went sneaking down the slope of it to
labboard, in the dark, towards the texas, feeling our way slow with our
feet, and spreading our hands out to fend off the guys, for it was so
dark we couldn't see no sign of them.  Pretty soon we struck the forward
end of the skylight, and clumb on to it; and the next step fetched us in
front of the captain's door, which was open, and by Jimminy, away down
through the texas-hall we see a light! and all in the same second we
seem to hear low voices in yonder!

Jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick, and told me to come
along.  I says, all right, and was going to start for the raft; but just
then I heard a voice wail out and say:

“Oh, please don't, boys; I swear I won't ever tell!”

Another voice said, pretty loud:

“It's a lie, Jim Turner.  You've acted this way before.  You always want
more'n your share of the truck, and you've always got it, too, because
you've swore 't if you didn't you'd tell.  But this time you've said
it jest one time too many.  You're the meanest, treacherousest hound in
this country.”

By this time Jim was gone for the raft.  I was just a-biling with
curiosity; and I says to myself, Tom Sawyer wouldn't back out now,
and so I won't either; I'm a-going to see what's going on here.  So I
dropped on my hands and knees in the little passage, and crept aft
in the dark till there warn't but one stateroom betwixt me and the
cross-hall of the texas.  Then in there I see a man stretched on the
floor and tied hand and foot, and two men standing over him, and one
of them had a dim lantern in his hand, and the other one had a pistol.
 This one kept pointing the pistol at the man's head on the floor, and
saying:

“I'd _like_ to!  And I orter, too--a mean skunk!”

The man on the floor would shrivel up and say, “Oh, please don't, Bill;
I hain't ever goin' to tell.”

And every time he said that the man with the lantern would laugh and
say:

“'Deed you _ain't!_  You never said no truer thing 'n that, you bet
you.” And once he said:  “Hear him beg! and yit if we hadn't got the
best of him and tied him he'd a killed us both.  And what _for_?  Jist
for noth'n. Jist because we stood on our _rights_--that's what for.  But
I lay you ain't a-goin' to threaten nobody any more, Jim Turner.  Put
_up_ that pistol, Bill.”

Bill says:

“I don't want to, Jake Packard.  I'm for killin' him--and didn't he kill
old Hatfield jist the same way--and don't he deserve it?”

“But I don't _want_ him killed, and I've got my reasons for it.”

“Bless yo' heart for them words, Jake Packard!  I'll never forgit you
long's I live!” says the man on the floor, sort of blubbering.

Packard didn't take no notice of that, but hung up his lantern on a nail
and started towards where I was there in the dark, and motioned Bill
to come.  I crawfished as fast as I could about two yards, but the boat
slanted so that I couldn't make very good time; so to keep from getting
run over and catched I crawled into a stateroom on the upper side.
 The man came a-pawing along in the dark, and when Packard got to my
stateroom, he says:

“Here--come in here.”

And in he come, and Bill after him.  But before they got in I was up
in the upper berth, cornered, and sorry I come.  Then they stood there,
with their hands on the ledge of the berth, and talked.  I couldn't see
them, but I could tell where they was by the whisky they'd been having.
 I was glad I didn't drink whisky; but it wouldn't made much difference
anyway, because most of the time they couldn't a treed me because I
didn't breathe.  I was too scared.  And, besides, a body _couldn't_
breathe and hear such talk.  They talked low and earnest.  Bill wanted
to kill Turner.  He says:

“He's said he'll tell, and he will.  If we was to give both our shares
to him _now_ it wouldn't make no difference after the row and the way
we've served him.  Shore's you're born, he'll turn State's evidence; now
you hear _me_.  I'm for putting him out of his troubles.”

“So'm I,” says Packard, very quiet.

“Blame it, I'd sorter begun to think you wasn't.  Well, then, that's all
right.  Le's go and do it.”

“Hold on a minute; I hain't had my say yit.  You listen to me.
Shooting's good, but there's quieter ways if the thing's _got_ to be
done. But what I say is this:  it ain't good sense to go court'n around
after a halter if you can git at what you're up to in some way that's
jist as good and at the same time don't bring you into no resks.  Ain't
that so?”

“You bet it is.  But how you goin' to manage it this time?”

“Well, my idea is this:  we'll rustle around and gather up whatever
pickins we've overlooked in the staterooms, and shove for shore and hide
the truck. Then we'll wait.  Now I say it ain't a-goin' to be more'n two
hours befo' this wrack breaks up and washes off down the river.  See?
He'll be drownded, and won't have nobody to blame for it but his own
self.  I reckon that's a considerble sight better 'n killin' of him.
 I'm unfavorable to killin' a man as long as you can git aroun' it; it
ain't good sense, it ain't good morals.  Ain't I right?”

“Yes, I reck'n you are.  But s'pose she _don't_ break up and wash off?”

“Well, we can wait the two hours anyway and see, can't we?”

“All right, then; come along.”

So they started, and I lit out, all in a cold sweat, and scrambled
forward. It was dark as pitch there; but I said, in a kind of a coarse
whisper, “Jim!” and he answered up, right at my elbow, with a sort of a
moan, and I says:

“Quick, Jim, it ain't no time for fooling around and moaning; there's a
gang of murderers in yonder, and if we don't hunt up their boat and set
her drifting down the river so these fellows can't get away from the
wreck there's one of 'em going to be in a bad fix.  But if we find their
boat we can put _all_ of 'em in a bad fix--for the sheriff 'll get 'em.
Quick--hurry!  I'll hunt the labboard side, you hunt the stabboard. You
start at the raft, and--”

“Oh, my lordy, lordy!  _raf'_?  Dey ain' no raf' no mo'; she done broke
loose en gone I--en here we is!”




CHAPTER XIII.

WELL, I catched my breath and most fainted.  Shut up on a wreck with
such a gang as that!  But it warn't no time to be sentimentering.  We'd
_got_ to find that boat now--had to have it for ourselves.  So we went
a-quaking and shaking down the stabboard side, and slow work it was,
too--seemed a week before we got to the stern.  No sign of a boat.  Jim
said he didn't believe he could go any further--so scared he hadn't
hardly any strength left, he said.  But I said, come on, if we get left
on this wreck we are in a fix, sure.  So on we prowled again.  We struck
for the stern of the texas, and found it, and then scrabbled along
forwards on the skylight, hanging on from shutter to shutter, for the
edge of the skylight was in the water.  When we got pretty close to the
cross-hall door there was the skiff, sure enough!  I could just barely
see her.  I felt ever so thankful.  In another second I would a been
aboard of her, but just then the door opened.  One of the men stuck his
head out only about a couple of foot from me, and I thought I was gone;
but he jerked it in again, and says:

“Heave that blame lantern out o' sight, Bill!”

He flung a bag of something into the boat, and then got in himself and
set down.  It was Packard.  Then Bill _he_ come out and got in.  Packard
says, in a low voice:

“All ready--shove off!”

I couldn't hardly hang on to the shutters, I was so weak.  But Bill
says:

“Hold on--'d you go through him?”

“No.  Didn't you?”

“No.  So he's got his share o' the cash yet.”

“Well, then, come along; no use to take truck and leave money.”

“Say, won't he suspicion what we're up to?”

“Maybe he won't.  But we got to have it anyway. Come along.”

So they got out and went in.

The door slammed to because it was on the careened side; and in a half
second I was in the boat, and Jim come tumbling after me.  I out with my
knife and cut the rope, and away we went!

We didn't touch an oar, and we didn't speak nor whisper, nor hardly even
breathe.  We went gliding swift along, dead silent, past the tip of the
paddle-box, and past the stern; then in a second or two more we was a
hundred yards below the wreck, and the darkness soaked her up, every
last sign of her, and we was safe, and knowed it.

When we was three or four hundred yards down-stream we see the lantern
show like a little spark at the texas door for a second, and we knowed
by that that the rascals had missed their boat, and was beginning to
understand that they was in just as much trouble now as Jim Turner was.

Then Jim manned the oars, and we took out after our raft.  Now was the
first time that I begun to worry about the men--I reckon I hadn't
had time to before.  I begun to think how dreadful it was, even for
murderers, to be in such a fix.  I says to myself, there ain't no
telling but I might come to be a murderer myself yet, and then how would
I like it?  So says I to Jim:

“The first light we see we'll land a hundred yards below it or above
it, in a place where it's a good hiding-place for you and the skiff, and
then I'll go and fix up some kind of a yarn, and get somebody to go for
that gang and get them out of their scrape, so they can be hung when
their time comes.”

But that idea was a failure; for pretty soon it begun to storm again,
and this time worse than ever.  The rain poured down, and never a light
showed; everybody in bed, I reckon.  We boomed along down the river,
watching for lights and watching for our raft.  After a long time the
rain let up, but the clouds stayed, and the lightning kept whimpering,
and by and by a flash showed us a black thing ahead, floating, and we
made for it.

It was the raft, and mighty glad was we to get aboard of it again.  We
seen a light now away down to the right, on shore.  So I said I would
go for it. The skiff was half full of plunder which that gang had stole
there on the wreck.  We hustled it on to the raft in a pile, and I told
Jim to float along down, and show a light when he judged he had gone
about two mile, and keep it burning till I come; then I manned my oars
and shoved for the light.  As I got down towards it three or four more
showed--up on a hillside.  It was a village.  I closed in above the shore
light, and laid on my oars and floated.  As I went by I see it was a
lantern hanging on the jackstaff of a double-hull ferryboat.  I skimmed
around for the watchman, a-wondering whereabouts he slept; and by and
by I found him roosting on the bitts forward, with his head down between
his knees.  I gave his shoulder two or three little shoves, and begun to
cry.

He stirred up in a kind of a startlish way; but when he see it was only
me he took a good gap and stretch, and then he says:

“Hello, what's up?  Don't cry, bub.  What's the trouble?”

I says:

“Pap, and mam, and sis, and--”

Then I broke down.  He says:

“Oh, dang it now, _don't_ take on so; we all has to have our troubles,
and this 'n 'll come out all right.  What's the matter with 'em?”

“They're--they're--are you the watchman of the boat?”

“Yes,” he says, kind of pretty-well-satisfied like.  “I'm the captain
and the owner and the mate and the pilot and watchman and head
deck-hand; and sometimes I'm the freight and passengers.  I ain't as
rich as old Jim Hornback, and I can't be so blame' generous and good
to Tom, Dick, and Harry as what he is, and slam around money the way he
does; but I've told him a many a time 't I wouldn't trade places with
him; for, says I, a sailor's life's the life for me, and I'm derned if
_I'd_ live two mile out o' town, where there ain't nothing ever goin'
on, not for all his spondulicks and as much more on top of it.  Says I--”

I broke in and says:

“They're in an awful peck of trouble, and--”

“_Who_ is?”

“Why, pap and mam and sis and Miss Hooker; and if you'd take your
ferryboat and go up there--”

“Up where?  Where are they?”

“On the wreck.”

“What wreck?”

“Why, there ain't but one.”

“What, you don't mean the Walter Scott?”

“Yes.”

“Good land! what are they doin' _there_, for gracious sakes?”

“Well, they didn't go there a-purpose.”

“I bet they didn't!  Why, great goodness, there ain't no chance for 'em
if they don't git off mighty quick!  Why, how in the nation did they
ever git into such a scrape?”

“Easy enough.  Miss Hooker was a-visiting up there to the town--”

“Yes, Booth's Landing--go on.”

“She was a-visiting there at Booth's Landing, and just in the edge of
the evening she started over with her nigger woman in the horse-ferry
to stay all night at her friend's house, Miss What-you-may-call-her I
disremember her name--and they lost their steering-oar, and swung
around and went a-floating down, stern first, about two mile, and
saddle-baggsed on the wreck, and the ferryman and the nigger woman and
the horses was all lost, but Miss Hooker she made a grab and got aboard
the wreck.  Well, about an hour after dark we come along down in our
trading-scow, and it was so dark we didn't notice the wreck till we was
right on it; and so _we_ saddle-baggsed; but all of us was saved but
Bill Whipple--and oh, he _was_ the best cretur!--I most wish 't it had
been me, I do.”

“My George!  It's the beatenest thing I ever struck.  And _then_ what
did you all do?”

“Well, we hollered and took on, but it's so wide there we couldn't
make nobody hear.  So pap said somebody got to get ashore and get help
somehow. I was the only one that could swim, so I made a dash for it,
and Miss Hooker she said if I didn't strike help sooner, come here and
hunt up her uncle, and he'd fix the thing.  I made the land about a mile
below, and been fooling along ever since, trying to get people to do
something, but they said, 'What, in such a night and such a current?
There ain't no sense in it; go for the steam ferry.'  Now if you'll go
and--”

“By Jackson, I'd _like_ to, and, blame it, I don't know but I will; but
who in the dingnation's a-going' to _pay_ for it?  Do you reckon your
pap--”

“Why _that's_ all right.  Miss Hooker she tole me, _particular_, that
her uncle Hornback--”

“Great guns! is _he_ her uncle?  Looky here, you break for that light
over yonder-way, and turn out west when you git there, and about a
quarter of a mile out you'll come to the tavern; tell 'em to dart you
out to Jim Hornback's, and he'll foot the bill.  And don't you fool
around any, because he'll want to know the news.  Tell him I'll have
his niece all safe before he can get to town.  Hump yourself, now; I'm
a-going up around the corner here to roust out my engineer.”

I struck for the light, but as soon as he turned the corner I went back
and got into my skiff and bailed her out, and then pulled up shore in
the easy water about six hundred yards, and tucked myself in among
some woodboats; for I couldn't rest easy till I could see the ferryboat
start. But take it all around, I was feeling ruther comfortable on
accounts of taking all this trouble for that gang, for not many would
a done it.  I wished the widow knowed about it.  I judged she would be
proud of me for helping these rapscallions, because rapscallions and
dead beats is the kind the widow and good people takes the most interest
in.

Well, before long here comes the wreck, dim and dusky, sliding along
down! A kind of cold shiver went through me, and then I struck out for
her.  She was very deep, and I see in a minute there warn't much chance
for anybody being alive in her.  I pulled all around her and hollered
a little, but there wasn't any answer; all dead still.  I felt a little
bit heavy-hearted about the gang, but not much, for I reckoned if they
could stand it I could.

Then here comes the ferryboat; so I shoved for the middle of the river
on a long down-stream slant; and when I judged I was out of eye-reach
I laid on my oars, and looked back and see her go and smell around the
wreck for Miss Hooker's remainders, because the captain would know her
uncle Hornback would want them; and then pretty soon the ferryboat give
it up and went for the shore, and I laid into my work and went a-booming
down the river.

It did seem a powerful long time before Jim's light showed up; and when
it did show it looked like it was a thousand mile off.  By the time I
got there the sky was beginning to get a little gray in the east; so we
struck for an island, and hid the raft, and sunk the skiff, and turned
in and slept like dead people.




CHAPTER XIV.

BY and by, when we got up, we turned over the truck the gang had stole
off of the wreck, and found boots, and blankets, and clothes, and all
sorts of other things, and a lot of books, and a spyglass, and three
boxes of seegars.  We hadn't ever been this rich before in neither of
our lives.  The seegars was prime.  We laid off all the afternoon in the
woods talking, and me reading the books, and having a general good
time. I told Jim all about what happened inside the wreck and at the
ferryboat, and I said these kinds of things was adventures; but he said
he didn't want no more adventures.  He said that when I went in the
texas and he crawled back to get on the raft and found her gone he
nearly died, because he judged it was all up with _him_ anyway it could
be fixed; for if he didn't get saved he would get drownded; and if he
did get saved, whoever saved him would send him back home so as to get
the reward, and then Miss Watson would sell him South, sure.  Well, he
was right; he was most always right; he had an uncommon level head for a
nigger.

I read considerable to Jim about kings and dukes and earls and such, and
how gaudy they dressed, and how much style they put on, and called each
other your majesty, and your grace, and your lordship, and so on, 'stead
of mister; and Jim's eyes bugged out, and he was interested.  He says:

“I didn' know dey was so many un um.  I hain't hearn 'bout none un um,
skasely, but ole King Sollermun, onless you counts dem kings dat's in a
pack er k'yards.  How much do a king git?”

“Get?”  I says; “why, they get a thousand dollars a month if they want
it; they can have just as much as they want; everything belongs to
them.”

“_Ain'_ dat gay?  En what dey got to do, Huck?”

“_They_ don't do nothing!  Why, how you talk! They just set around.”

“No; is dat so?”

“Of course it is.  They just set around--except, maybe, when there's a
war; then they go to the war.  But other times they just lazy around; or
go hawking--just hawking and sp--Sh!--d' you hear a noise?”

We skipped out and looked; but it warn't nothing but the flutter of a
steamboat's wheel away down, coming around the point; so we come back.

“Yes,” says I, “and other times, when things is dull, they fuss with the
parlyment; and if everybody don't go just so he whacks their heads off.
But mostly they hang round the harem.”

“Roun' de which?”

“Harem.”

“What's de harem?”

“The place where he keeps his wives.  Don't you know about the harem?
Solomon had one; he had about a million wives.”

“Why, yes, dat's so; I--I'd done forgot it.  A harem's a bo'd'n-house, I
reck'n.  Mos' likely dey has rackety times in de nussery.  En I reck'n
de wives quarrels considable; en dat 'crease de racket.  Yit dey say
Sollermun de wises' man dat ever live'.  I doan' take no stock in
dat. Bekase why: would a wise man want to live in de mids' er sich a
blim-blammin' all de time?  No--'deed he wouldn't.  A wise man 'ud take
en buil' a biler-factry; en den he could shet _down_ de biler-factry
when he want to res'.”

“Well, but he _was_ the wisest man, anyway; because the widow she told
me so, her own self.”

“I doan k'yer what de widder say, he _warn't_ no wise man nuther.  He
had some er de dad-fetchedes' ways I ever see.  Does you know 'bout dat
chile dat he 'uz gwyne to chop in two?”

“Yes, the widow told me all about it.”

“_Well_, den!  Warn' dat de beatenes' notion in de worl'?  You jes'
take en look at it a minute.  Dah's de stump, dah--dat's one er de women;
heah's you--dat's de yuther one; I's Sollermun; en dish yer dollar bill's
de chile.  Bofe un you claims it.  What does I do?  Does I shin aroun'
mongs' de neighbors en fine out which un you de bill _do_ b'long to, en
han' it over to de right one, all safe en soun', de way dat anybody dat
had any gumption would?  No; I take en whack de bill in _two_, en give
half un it to you, en de yuther half to de yuther woman.  Dat's de way
Sollermun was gwyne to do wid de chile.  Now I want to ast you:  what's
de use er dat half a bill?--can't buy noth'n wid it.  En what use is a
half a chile?  I wouldn' give a dern for a million un um.”

“But hang it, Jim, you've clean missed the point--blame it, you've missed
it a thousand mile.”

“Who?  Me?  Go 'long.  Doan' talk to me 'bout yo' pints.  I reck'n I
knows sense when I sees it; en dey ain' no sense in sich doin's as
dat. De 'spute warn't 'bout a half a chile, de 'spute was 'bout a whole
chile; en de man dat think he kin settle a 'spute 'bout a whole chile
wid a half a chile doan' know enough to come in out'n de rain.  Doan'
talk to me 'bout Sollermun, Huck, I knows him by de back.”

“But I tell you you don't get the point.”

“Blame de point!  I reck'n I knows what I knows.  En mine you, de _real_
pint is down furder--it's down deeper.  It lays in de way Sollermun was
raised.  You take a man dat's got on'y one or two chillen; is dat man
gwyne to be waseful o' chillen?  No, he ain't; he can't 'ford it.  _He_
know how to value 'em.  But you take a man dat's got 'bout five million
chillen runnin' roun' de house, en it's diffunt.  _He_ as soon chop a
chile in two as a cat. Dey's plenty mo'.  A chile er two, mo' er less,
warn't no consekens to Sollermun, dad fatch him!”

I never see such a nigger.  If he got a notion in his head once, there
warn't no getting it out again.  He was the most down on Solomon of
any nigger I ever see.  So I went to talking about other kings, and let
Solomon slide.  I told about Louis Sixteenth that got his head cut off
in France long time ago; and about his little boy the dolphin, that
would a been a king, but they took and shut him up in jail, and some say
he died there.

“Po' little chap.”

“But some says he got out and got away, and come to America.”

“Dat's good!  But he'll be pooty lonesome--dey ain' no kings here, is
dey, Huck?”

“No.”

“Den he cain't git no situation.  What he gwyne to do?”

“Well, I don't know.  Some of them gets on the police, and some of them
learns people how to talk French.”

“Why, Huck, doan' de French people talk de same way we does?”

“_No_, Jim; you couldn't understand a word they said--not a single word.”

“Well, now, I be ding-busted!  How do dat come?”

“I don't know; but it's so.  I got some of their jabber out of a book.
S'pose a man was to come to you and say Polly-voo-franzy--what would you
think?”

“I wouldn' think nuff'n; I'd take en bust him over de head--dat is, if he
warn't white.  I wouldn't 'low no nigger to call me dat.”

“Shucks, it ain't calling you anything.  It's only saying, do you know
how to talk French?”

“Well, den, why couldn't he _say_ it?”

“Why, he _is_ a-saying it.  That's a Frenchman's _way_ of saying it.”

“Well, it's a blame ridicklous way, en I doan' want to hear no mo' 'bout
it.  Dey ain' no sense in it.”

“Looky here, Jim; does a cat talk like we do?”

“No, a cat don't.”

“Well, does a cow?”

“No, a cow don't, nuther.”

“Does a cat talk like a cow, or a cow talk like a cat?”

“No, dey don't.”

“It's natural and right for 'em to talk different from each other, ain't
it?”

“Course.”

“And ain't it natural and right for a cat and a cow to talk different
from _us_?”

“Why, mos' sholy it is.”

“Well, then, why ain't it natural and right for a _Frenchman_ to talk
different from us?  You answer me that.”

“Is a cat a man, Huck?”

“No.”

“Well, den, dey ain't no sense in a cat talkin' like a man.  Is a cow a
man?--er is a cow a cat?”

“No, she ain't either of them.”

“Well, den, she ain't got no business to talk like either one er the
yuther of 'em.  Is a Frenchman a man?”

“Yes.”

“_Well_, den!  Dad blame it, why doan' he _talk_ like a man?  You answer
me _dat_!”

I see it warn't no use wasting words--you can't learn a nigger to argue.
So I quit.




CHAPTER XV.

WE judged that three nights more would fetch us to Cairo, at the bottom
of Illinois, where the Ohio River comes in, and that was what we was
after.  We would sell the raft and get on a steamboat and go way up the
Ohio amongst the free States, and then be out of trouble.

Well, the second night a fog begun to come on, and we made for a towhead
to tie to, for it wouldn't do to try to run in a fog; but when I paddled
ahead in the canoe, with the line to make fast, there warn't anything
but little saplings to tie to.  I passed the line around one of them
right on the edge of the cut bank, but there was a stiff current, and
the raft come booming down so lively she tore it out by the roots and
away she went.  I see the fog closing down, and it made me so sick and
scared I couldn't budge for most a half a minute it seemed to me--and
then there warn't no raft in sight; you couldn't see twenty yards.  I
jumped into the canoe and run back to the stern, and grabbed the paddle
and set her back a stroke.  But she didn't come.  I was in such a hurry
I hadn't untied her.  I got up and tried to untie her, but I was so
excited my hands shook so I couldn't hardly do anything with them.

As soon as I got started I took out after the raft, hot and heavy, right
down the towhead.  That was all right as far as it went, but the towhead
warn't sixty yards long, and the minute I flew by the foot of it I shot
out into the solid white fog, and hadn't no more idea which way I was
going than a dead man.

Thinks I, it won't do to paddle; first I know I'll run into the bank
or a towhead or something; I got to set still and float, and yet it's
mighty fidgety business to have to hold your hands still at such a time.
 I whooped and listened.  Away down there somewheres I hears a small
whoop, and up comes my spirits.  I went tearing after it, listening
sharp to hear it again.  The next time it come I see I warn't heading
for it, but heading away to the right of it.  And the next time I was
heading away to the left of it--and not gaining on it much either, for
I was flying around, this way and that and t'other, but it was going
straight ahead all the time.

I did wish the fool would think to beat a tin pan, and beat it all the
time, but he never did, and it was the still places between the whoops
that was making the trouble for me.  Well, I fought along, and directly
I hears the whoop _behind_ me.  I was tangled good now.  That was
somebody else's whoop, or else I was turned around.

I throwed the paddle down.  I heard the whoop again; it was behind me
yet, but in a different place; it kept coming, and kept changing its
place, and I kept answering, till by and by it was in front of me again,
and I knowed the current had swung the canoe's head down-stream, and I
was all right if that was Jim and not some other raftsman hollering.
 I couldn't tell nothing about voices in a fog, for nothing don't look
natural nor sound natural in a fog.

The whooping went on, and in about a minute I come a-booming down on a
cut bank with smoky ghosts of big trees on it, and the current throwed
me off to the left and shot by, amongst a lot of snags that fairly
roared, the currrent was tearing by them so swift.

In another second or two it was solid white and still again.  I set
perfectly still then, listening to my heart thump, and I reckon I didn't
draw a breath while it thumped a hundred.

I just give up then.  I knowed what the matter was.  That cut bank
was an island, and Jim had gone down t'other side of it.  It warn't no
towhead that you could float by in ten minutes.  It had the big timber
of a regular island; it might be five or six miles long and more than
half a mile wide.

I kept quiet, with my ears cocked, about fifteen minutes, I reckon.  I
was floating along, of course, four or five miles an hour; but you don't
ever think of that.  No, you _feel_ like you are laying dead still on
the water; and if a little glimpse of a snag slips by you don't think to
yourself how fast _you're_ going, but you catch your breath and think,
my! how that snag's tearing along.  If you think it ain't dismal and
lonesome out in a fog that way by yourself in the night, you try it
once--you'll see.

Next, for about a half an hour, I whoops now and then; at last I hears
the answer a long ways off, and tries to follow it, but I couldn't do
it, and directly I judged I'd got into a nest of towheads, for I had
little dim glimpses of them on both sides of me--sometimes just a narrow
channel between, and some that I couldn't see I knowed was there because
I'd hear the wash of the current against the old dead brush and trash
that hung over the banks.  Well, I warn't long loosing the whoops down
amongst the towheads; and I only tried to chase them a little while,
anyway, because it was worse than chasing a Jack-o'-lantern.  You never
knowed a sound dodge around so, and swap places so quick and so much.

I had to claw away from the bank pretty lively four or five times, to
keep from knocking the islands out of the river; and so I judged the
raft must be butting into the bank every now and then, or else it would
get further ahead and clear out of hearing--it was floating a little
faster than what I was.

Well, I seemed to be in the open river again by and by, but I couldn't
hear no sign of a whoop nowheres.  I reckoned Jim had fetched up on a
snag, maybe, and it was all up with him.  I was good and tired, so I
laid down in the canoe and said I wouldn't bother no more.  I didn't
want to go to sleep, of course; but I was so sleepy I couldn't help it;
so I thought I would take jest one little cat-nap.

But I reckon it was more than a cat-nap, for when I waked up the stars
was shining bright, the fog was all gone, and I was spinning down a
big bend stern first.  First I didn't know where I was; I thought I was
dreaming; and when things began to come back to me they seemed to come
up dim out of last week.

It was a monstrous big river here, with the tallest and the thickest
kind of timber on both banks; just a solid wall, as well as I could see
by the stars.  I looked away down-stream, and seen a black speck on the
water. I took after it; but when I got to it it warn't nothing but a
couple of sawlogs made fast together.  Then I see another speck, and
chased that; then another, and this time I was right.  It was the raft.

When I got to it Jim was setting there with his head down between his
knees, asleep, with his right arm hanging over the steering-oar.  The
other oar was smashed off, and the raft was littered up with leaves and
branches and dirt.  So she'd had a rough time.

I made fast and laid down under Jim's nose on the raft, and began to
gap, and stretch my fists out against Jim, and says:

“Hello, Jim, have I been asleep?  Why didn't you stir me up?”

“Goodness gracious, is dat you, Huck?  En you ain' dead--you ain'
drownded--you's back agin?  It's too good for true, honey, it's too good
for true. Lemme look at you chile, lemme feel o' you.  No, you ain'
dead! you's back agin, 'live en soun', jis de same ole Huck--de same ole
Huck, thanks to goodness!”

“What's the matter with you, Jim?  You been a-drinking?”

“Drinkin'?  Has I ben a-drinkin'?  Has I had a chance to be a-drinkin'?”

“Well, then, what makes you talk so wild?”

“How does I talk wild?”

“_How_?  Why, hain't you been talking about my coming back, and all that
stuff, as if I'd been gone away?”

“Huck--Huck Finn, you look me in de eye; look me in de eye.  _Hain't_ you
ben gone away?”

“Gone away?  Why, what in the nation do you mean?  I hain't been gone
anywheres.  Where would I go to?”

“Well, looky here, boss, dey's sumf'n wrong, dey is.  Is I _me_, or who
_is_ I? Is I heah, or whah _is_ I?  Now dat's what I wants to know.”

“Well, I think you're here, plain enough, but I think you're a
tangle-headed old fool, Jim.”

“I is, is I?  Well, you answer me dis:  Didn't you tote out de line in
de canoe fer to make fas' to de tow-head?”

“No, I didn't.  What tow-head?  I hain't see no tow-head.”

“You hain't seen no towhead?  Looky here, didn't de line pull loose en
de raf' go a-hummin' down de river, en leave you en de canoe behine in
de fog?”

“What fog?”

“Why, de fog!--de fog dat's been aroun' all night.  En didn't you whoop,
en didn't I whoop, tell we got mix' up in de islands en one un us got
los' en t'other one was jis' as good as los', 'kase he didn' know whah
he wuz? En didn't I bust up agin a lot er dem islands en have a turrible
time en mos' git drownded?  Now ain' dat so, boss--ain't it so?  You
answer me dat.”

“Well, this is too many for me, Jim.  I hain't seen no fog, nor no
islands, nor no troubles, nor nothing.  I been setting here talking with
you all night till you went to sleep about ten minutes ago, and I reckon
I done the same.  You couldn't a got drunk in that time, so of course
you've been dreaming.”

“Dad fetch it, how is I gwyne to dream all dat in ten minutes?”

“Well, hang it all, you did dream it, because there didn't any of it
happen.”

“But, Huck, it's all jis' as plain to me as--”

“It don't make no difference how plain it is; there ain't nothing in it.
I know, because I've been here all the time.”

Jim didn't say nothing for about five minutes, but set there studying
over it.  Then he says:

“Well, den, I reck'n I did dream it, Huck; but dog my cats ef it ain't
de powerfullest dream I ever see.  En I hain't ever had no dream b'fo'
dat's tired me like dis one.”

“Oh, well, that's all right, because a dream does tire a body like
everything sometimes.  But this one was a staving dream; tell me all
about it, Jim.”

So Jim went to work and told me the whole thing right through, just as
it happened, only he painted it up considerable.  Then he said he must
start in and “'terpret” it, because it was sent for a warning.  He said
the first towhead stood for a man that would try to do us some good, but
the current was another man that would get us away from him.  The whoops
was warnings that would come to us every now and then, and if we didn't
try hard to make out to understand them they'd just take us into bad
luck, 'stead of keeping us out of it.  The lot of towheads was troubles
we was going to get into with quarrelsome people and all kinds of mean
folks, but if we minded our business and didn't talk back and aggravate
them, we would pull through and get out of the fog and into the big
clear river, which was the free States, and wouldn't have no more
trouble.

It had clouded up pretty dark just after I got on to the raft, but it
was clearing up again now.

“Oh, well, that's all interpreted well enough as far as it goes, Jim,” I
says; “but what does _these_ things stand for?”

It was the leaves and rubbish on the raft and the smashed oar.  You
could see them first-rate now.

Jim looked at the trash, and then looked at me, and back at the trash
again.  He had got the dream fixed so strong in his head that he
couldn't seem to shake it loose and get the facts back into its place
again right away.  But when he did get the thing straightened around he
looked at me steady without ever smiling, and says:

“What do dey stan' for?  I'se gwyne to tell you.  When I got all wore
out wid work, en wid de callin' for you, en went to sleep, my heart wuz
mos' broke bekase you wuz los', en I didn' k'yer no' mo' what become
er me en de raf'.  En when I wake up en fine you back agin, all safe
en soun', de tears come, en I could a got down on my knees en kiss yo'
foot, I's so thankful. En all you wuz thinkin' 'bout wuz how you could
make a fool uv ole Jim wid a lie.  Dat truck dah is _trash_; en trash
is what people is dat puts dirt on de head er dey fren's en makes 'em
ashamed.”

Then he got up slow and walked to the wigwam, and went in there without
saying anything but that.  But that was enough.  It made me feel so mean
I could almost kissed _his_ foot to get him to take it back.

It was fifteen minutes before I could work myself up to go and humble
myself to a nigger; but I done it, and I warn't ever sorry for it
afterwards, neither.  I didn't do him no more mean tricks, and I
wouldn't done that one if I'd a knowed it would make him feel that way.




CHAPTER XVI.

WE slept most all day, and started out at night, a little ways behind a
monstrous long raft that was as long going by as a procession.  She had
four long sweeps at each end, so we judged she carried as many as thirty
men, likely.  She had five big wigwams aboard, wide apart, and an open
camp fire in the middle, and a tall flag-pole at each end.  There was a
power of style about her.  It _amounted_ to something being a raftsman
on such a craft as that.

We went drifting down into a big bend, and the night clouded up and got
hot.  The river was very wide, and was walled with solid timber on
both sides; you couldn't see a break in it hardly ever, or a light.  We
talked about Cairo, and wondered whether we would know it when we got to
it.  I said likely we wouldn't, because I had heard say there warn't but
about a dozen houses there, and if they didn't happen to have them lit
up, how was we going to know we was passing a town?  Jim said if the two
big rivers joined together there, that would show.  But I said maybe
we might think we was passing the foot of an island and coming into the
same old river again. That disturbed Jim--and me too.  So the question
was, what to do?  I said, paddle ashore the first time a light showed,
and tell them pap was behind, coming along with a trading-scow, and
was a green hand at the business, and wanted to know how far it was to
Cairo.  Jim thought it was a good idea, so we took a smoke on it and
waited.

There warn't nothing to do now but to look out sharp for the town, and
not pass it without seeing it.  He said he'd be mighty sure to see it,
because he'd be a free man the minute he seen it, but if he missed it
he'd be in a slave country again and no more show for freedom.  Every
little while he jumps up and says:

“Dah she is?”

But it warn't.  It was Jack-o'-lanterns, or lightning bugs; so he set
down again, and went to watching, same as before.  Jim said it made him
all over trembly and feverish to be so close to freedom.  Well, I can
tell you it made me all over trembly and feverish, too, to hear him,
because I begun to get it through my head that he _was_ most free--and
who was to blame for it?  Why, _me_.  I couldn't get that out of my
conscience, no how nor no way. It got to troubling me so I couldn't
rest; I couldn't stay still in one place.  It hadn't ever come home to
me before, what this thing was that I was doing.  But now it did; and it
stayed with me, and scorched me more and more.  I tried to make out to
myself that I warn't to blame, because I didn't run Jim off from his
rightful owner; but it warn't no use, conscience up and says, every
time, “But you knowed he was running for his freedom, and you could a
paddled ashore and told somebody.”  That was so--I couldn't get around
that noway.  That was where it pinched.  Conscience says to me, “What
had poor Miss Watson done to you that you could see her nigger go off
right under your eyes and never say one single word?  What did that poor
old woman do to you that you could treat her so mean?  Why, she tried to
learn you your book, she tried to learn you your manners, she tried to
be good to you every way she knowed how.  _That's_ what she done.”

I got to feeling so mean and so miserable I most wished I was dead.  I
fidgeted up and down the raft, abusing myself to myself, and Jim was
fidgeting up and down past me.  We neither of us could keep still.
 Every time he danced around and says, “Dah's Cairo!” it went through me
like a shot, and I thought if it _was_ Cairo I reckoned I would die of
miserableness.

Jim talked out loud all the time while I was talking to myself.  He was
saying how the first thing he would do when he got to a free State he
would go to saving up money and never spend a single cent, and when he
got enough he would buy his wife, which was owned on a farm close to
where Miss Watson lived; and then they would both work to buy the
two children, and if their master wouldn't sell them, they'd get an
Ab'litionist to go and steal them.

It most froze me to hear such talk.  He wouldn't ever dared to talk such
talk in his life before.  Just see what a difference it made in him the
minute he judged he was about free.  It was according to the old saying,
“Give a nigger an inch and he'll take an ell.”  Thinks I, this is what
comes of my not thinking.  Here was this nigger, which I had as good
as helped to run away, coming right out flat-footed and saying he would
steal his children--children that belonged to a man I didn't even know; a
man that hadn't ever done me no harm.

I was sorry to hear Jim say that, it was such a lowering of him.  My
conscience got to stirring me up hotter than ever, until at last I says
to it, “Let up on me--it ain't too late yet--I'll paddle ashore at the
first light and tell.”  I felt easy and happy and light as a feather
right off.  All my troubles was gone.  I went to looking out sharp for a
light, and sort of singing to myself.  By and by one showed.  Jim sings
out:

“We's safe, Huck, we's safe!  Jump up and crack yo' heels!  Dat's de
good ole Cairo at las', I jis knows it!”

I says:

“I'll take the canoe and go and see, Jim.  It mightn't be, you know.”

He jumped and got the canoe ready, and put his old coat in the bottom
for me to set on, and give me the paddle; and as I shoved off, he says:

“Pooty soon I'll be a-shout'n' for joy, en I'll say, it's all on
accounts o' Huck; I's a free man, en I couldn't ever ben free ef it
hadn' ben for Huck; Huck done it.  Jim won't ever forgit you, Huck;
you's de bes' fren' Jim's ever had; en you's de _only_ fren' ole Jim's
got now.”

I was paddling off, all in a sweat to tell on him; but when he says
this, it seemed to kind of take the tuck all out of me.  I went along
slow then, and I warn't right down certain whether I was glad I started
or whether I warn't.  When I was fifty yards off, Jim says:

“Dah you goes, de ole true Huck; de on'y white genlman dat ever kep' his
promise to ole Jim.”

Well, I just felt sick.  But I says, I _got_ to do it--I can't get _out_
of it.  Right then along comes a skiff with two men in it with guns, and
they stopped and I stopped.  One of them says:

“What's that yonder?”

“A piece of a raft,” I says.

“Do you belong on it?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Any men on it?”

“Only one, sir.”

“Well, there's five niggers run off to-night up yonder, above the head
of the bend.  Is your man white or black?”

I didn't answer up prompt.  I tried to, but the words wouldn't come. I
tried for a second or two to brace up and out with it, but I warn't man
enough--hadn't the spunk of a rabbit.  I see I was weakening; so I just
give up trying, and up and says:

“He's white.”

“I reckon we'll go and see for ourselves.”

“I wish you would,” says I, “because it's pap that's there, and maybe
you'd help me tow the raft ashore where the light is.  He's sick--and so
is mam and Mary Ann.”

“Oh, the devil! we're in a hurry, boy.  But I s'pose we've got to.
 Come, buckle to your paddle, and let's get along.”

I buckled to my paddle and they laid to their oars.  When we had made a
stroke or two, I says:

“Pap'll be mighty much obleeged to you, I can tell you.  Everybody goes
away when I want them to help me tow the raft ashore, and I can't do it
by myself.”

“Well, that's infernal mean.  Odd, too.  Say, boy, what's the matter
with your father?”

“It's the--a--the--well, it ain't anything much.”

They stopped pulling.  It warn't but a mighty little ways to the raft
now. One says:

“Boy, that's a lie.  What _is_ the matter with your pap?  Answer up
square now, and it'll be the better for you.”

“I will, sir, I will, honest--but don't leave us, please.  It's
the--the--Gentlemen, if you'll only pull ahead, and let me heave you the
headline, you won't have to come a-near the raft--please do.”

“Set her back, John, set her back!” says one.  They backed water.  “Keep
away, boy--keep to looard.  Confound it, I just expect the wind has
blowed it to us.  Your pap's got the small-pox, and you know it precious
well.  Why didn't you come out and say so?  Do you want to spread it all
over?”

“Well,” says I, a-blubbering, “I've told everybody before, and they just
went away and left us.”

“Poor devil, there's something in that.  We are right down sorry for
you, but we--well, hang it, we don't want the small-pox, you see.  Look
here, I'll tell you what to do.  Don't you try to land by yourself, or
you'll smash everything to pieces.  You float along down about twenty
miles, and you'll come to a town on the left-hand side of the river.  It
will be long after sun-up then, and when you ask for help you tell them
your folks are all down with chills and fever.  Don't be a fool again,
and let people guess what is the matter.  Now we're trying to do you a
kindness; so you just put twenty miles between us, that's a good boy.
 It wouldn't do any good to land yonder where the light is--it's only a
wood-yard. Say, I reckon your father's poor, and I'm bound to say he's
in pretty hard luck.  Here, I'll put a twenty-dollar gold piece on this
board, and you get it when it floats by.  I feel mighty mean to leave
you; but my kingdom! it won't do to fool with small-pox, don't you see?”

“Hold on, Parker,” says the other man, “here's a twenty to put on the
board for me.  Good-bye, boy; you do as Mr. Parker told you, and you'll
be all right.”

“That's so, my boy--good-bye, good-bye.  If you see any runaway niggers
you get help and nab them, and you can make some money by it.”

“Good-bye, sir,” says I; “I won't let no runaway niggers get by me if I
can help it.”

They went off and I got aboard the raft, feeling bad and low, because I
knowed very well I had done wrong, and I see it warn't no use for me
to try to learn to do right; a body that don't get _started_ right when
he's little ain't got no show--when the pinch comes there ain't nothing
to back him up and keep him to his work, and so he gets beat.  Then I
thought a minute, and says to myself, hold on; s'pose you'd a done right
and give Jim up, would you felt better than what you do now?  No, says
I, I'd feel bad--I'd feel just the same way I do now.  Well, then, says
I, what's the use you learning to do right when it's troublesome to do
right and ain't no trouble to do wrong, and the wages is just the same?
 I was stuck.  I couldn't answer that.  So I reckoned I wouldn't bother
no more about it, but after this always do whichever come handiest at
the time.

I went into the wigwam; Jim warn't there.  I looked all around; he
warn't anywhere.  I says:

“Jim!”

“Here I is, Huck.  Is dey out o' sight yit?  Don't talk loud.”

He was in the river under the stern oar, with just his nose out.  I told
him they were out of sight, so he come aboard.  He says:

“I was a-listenin' to all de talk, en I slips into de river en was gwyne
to shove for sho' if dey come aboard.  Den I was gwyne to swim to de
raf' agin when dey was gone.  But lawsy, how you did fool 'em, Huck!
 Dat _wuz_ de smartes' dodge!  I tell you, chile, I'spec it save' ole
Jim--ole Jim ain't going to forgit you for dat, honey.”

Then we talked about the money.  It was a pretty good raise--twenty
dollars apiece.  Jim said we could take deck passage on a steamboat
now, and the money would last us as far as we wanted to go in the free
States. He said twenty mile more warn't far for the raft to go, but he
wished we was already there.

Towards daybreak we tied up, and Jim was mighty particular about hiding
the raft good.  Then he worked all day fixing things in bundles, and
getting all ready to quit rafting.

That night about ten we hove in sight of the lights of a town away down
in a left-hand bend.

I went off in the canoe to ask about it.  Pretty soon I found a man out
in the river with a skiff, setting a trot-line.  I ranged up and says:

“Mister, is that town Cairo?”

“Cairo? no.  You must be a blame' fool.”

“What town is it, mister?”

“If you want to know, go and find out.  If you stay here botherin'
around me for about a half a minute longer you'll get something you
won't want.”

I paddled to the raft.  Jim was awful disappointed, but I said never
mind, Cairo would be the next place, I reckoned.

We passed another town before daylight, and I was going out again; but
it was high ground, so I didn't go.  No high ground about Cairo, Jim
said. I had forgot it.  We laid up for the day on a towhead tolerable
close to the left-hand bank.  I begun to suspicion something.  So did
Jim.  I says:

“Maybe we went by Cairo in the fog that night.”

He says:

“Doan' le's talk about it, Huck.  Po' niggers can't have no luck.  I
awluz 'spected dat rattlesnake-skin warn't done wid its work.”

“I wish I'd never seen that snake-skin, Jim--I do wish I'd never laid
eyes on it.”

“It ain't yo' fault, Huck; you didn' know.  Don't you blame yo'self
'bout it.”

When it was daylight, here was the clear Ohio water inshore, sure
enough, and outside was the old regular Muddy!  So it was all up with
Cairo.

We talked it all over.  It wouldn't do to take to the shore; we couldn't
take the raft up the stream, of course.  There warn't no way but to wait
for dark, and start back in the canoe and take the chances.  So we slept
all day amongst the cottonwood thicket, so as to be fresh for the work,
and when we went back to the raft about dark the canoe was gone!

We didn't say a word for a good while.  There warn't anything to
say.  We both knowed well enough it was some more work of the
rattlesnake-skin; so what was the use to talk about it?  It would only
look like we was finding fault, and that would be bound to fetch more
bad luck--and keep on fetching it, too, till we knowed enough to keep
still.

By and by we talked about what we better do, and found there warn't no
way but just to go along down with the raft till we got a chance to buy
a canoe to go back in.  We warn't going to borrow it when there warn't
anybody around, the way pap would do, for that might set people after
us.

So we shoved out after dark on the raft.

Anybody that don't believe yet that it's foolishness to handle a
snake-skin, after all that that snake-skin done for us, will believe it
now if they read on and see what more it done for us.

The place to buy canoes is off of rafts laying up at shore.  But we
didn't see no rafts laying up; so we went along during three hours and
more.  Well, the night got gray and ruther thick, which is the next
meanest thing to fog.  You can't tell the shape of the river, and you
can't see no distance. It got to be very late and still, and then along
comes a steamboat up the river.  We lit the lantern, and judged she
would see it.  Up-stream boats didn't generly come close to us; they
go out and follow the bars and hunt for easy water under the reefs; but
nights like this they bull right up the channel against the whole river.

We could hear her pounding along, but we didn't see her good till she
was close.  She aimed right for us.  Often they do that and try to see
how close they can come without touching; sometimes the wheel bites off
a sweep, and then the pilot sticks his head out and laughs, and thinks
he's mighty smart.  Well, here she comes, and we said she was going to
try and shave us; but she didn't seem to be sheering off a bit.  She
was a big one, and she was coming in a hurry, too, looking like a black
cloud with rows of glow-worms around it; but all of a sudden she bulged
out, big and scary, with a long row of wide-open furnace doors shining
like red-hot teeth, and her monstrous bows and guards hanging right
over us.  There was a yell at us, and a jingling of bells to stop the
engines, a powwow of cussing, and whistling of steam--and as Jim went
overboard on one side and I on the other, she come smashing straight
through the raft.

I dived--and I aimed to find the bottom, too, for a thirty-foot wheel
had got to go over me, and I wanted it to have plenty of room.  I could
always stay under water a minute; this time I reckon I stayed under a
minute and a half.  Then I bounced for the top in a hurry, for I was
nearly busting.  I popped out to my armpits and blowed the water out of
my nose, and puffed a bit.  Of course there was a booming current; and
of course that boat started her engines again ten seconds after she
stopped them, for they never cared much for raftsmen; so now she was
churning along up the river, out of sight in the thick weather, though I
could hear her.

I sung out for Jim about a dozen times, but I didn't get any answer;
so I grabbed a plank that touched me while I was “treading water,” and
struck out for shore, shoving it ahead of me.  But I made out to see
that the drift of the current was towards the left-hand shore, which
meant that I was in a crossing; so I changed off and went that way.

It was one of these long, slanting, two-mile crossings; so I was a good
long time in getting over.  I made a safe landing, and clumb up the
bank. I couldn't see but a little ways, but I went poking along over
rough ground for a quarter of a mile or more, and then I run across a
big old-fashioned double log-house before I noticed it.  I was going to
rush by and get away, but a lot of dogs jumped out and went to howling
and barking at me, and I knowed better than to move another peg.




CHAPTER XVII.

IN about a minute somebody spoke out of a window without putting his
head out, and says:

“Be done, boys!  Who's there?”

I says:

“It's me.”

“Who's me?”

“George Jackson, sir.”

“What do you want?”

“I don't want nothing, sir.  I only want to go along by, but the dogs
won't let me.”

“What are you prowling around here this time of night for--hey?”

“I warn't prowling around, sir, I fell overboard off of the steamboat.”

“Oh, you did, did you?  Strike a light there, somebody.  What did you
say your name was?”

“George Jackson, sir.  I'm only a boy.”

“Look here, if you're telling the truth you needn't be afraid--nobody'll
hurt you.  But don't try to budge; stand right where you are.  Rouse out
Bob and Tom, some of you, and fetch the guns.  George Jackson, is there
anybody with you?”

“No, sir, nobody.”

I heard the people stirring around in the house now, and see a light.
The man sung out:

“Snatch that light away, Betsy, you old fool--ain't you got any sense?
Put it on the floor behind the front door.  Bob, if you and Tom are
ready, take your places.”

“All ready.”

“Now, George Jackson, do you know the Shepherdsons?”

“No, sir; I never heard of them.”

“Well, that may be so, and it mayn't.  Now, all ready.  Step forward,
George Jackson.  And mind, don't you hurry--come mighty slow.  If there's
anybody with you, let him keep back--if he shows himself he'll be shot.
Come along now.  Come slow; push the door open yourself--just enough to
squeeze in, d' you hear?”

I didn't hurry; I couldn't if I'd a wanted to.  I took one slow step at
a time and there warn't a sound, only I thought I could hear my heart.
 The dogs were as still as the humans, but they followed a little behind
me. When I got to the three log doorsteps I heard them unlocking and
unbarring and unbolting.  I put my hand on the door and pushed it a
little and a little more till somebody said, “There, that's enough--put
your head in.” I done it, but I judged they would take it off.

The candle was on the floor, and there they all was, looking at me, and
me at them, for about a quarter of a minute:  Three big men with guns
pointed at me, which made me wince, I tell you; the oldest, gray
and about sixty, the other two thirty or more--all of them fine and
handsome--and the sweetest old gray-headed lady, and back of her two
young women which I couldn't see right well.  The old gentleman says:

“There; I reckon it's all right.  Come in.”

As soon as I was in the old gentleman he locked the door and barred it
and bolted it, and told the young men to come in with their guns, and
they all went in a big parlor that had a new rag carpet on the floor,
and got together in a corner that was out of the range of the front
windows--there warn't none on the side.  They held the candle, and took a
good look at me, and all said, “Why, _he_ ain't a Shepherdson--no, there
ain't any Shepherdson about him.”  Then the old man said he hoped I
wouldn't mind being searched for arms, because he didn't mean no harm by
it--it was only to make sure.  So he didn't pry into my pockets, but only
felt outside with his hands, and said it was all right.  He told me to
make myself easy and at home, and tell all about myself; but the old
lady says:

“Why, bless you, Saul, the poor thing's as wet as he can be; and don't
you reckon it may be he's hungry?”

“True for you, Rachel--I forgot.”

So the old lady says:

“Betsy” (this was a nigger woman), “you fly around and get him something
to eat as quick as you can, poor thing; and one of you girls go and wake
up Buck and tell him--oh, here he is himself.  Buck, take this little
stranger and get the wet clothes off from him and dress him up in some
of yours that's dry.”

Buck looked about as old as me--thirteen or fourteen or along there,
though he was a little bigger than me.  He hadn't on anything but a
shirt, and he was very frowzy-headed.  He came in gaping and digging one
fist into his eyes, and he was dragging a gun along with the other one.
He says:

“Ain't they no Shepherdsons around?”

They said, no, 'twas a false alarm.

“Well,” he says, “if they'd a ben some, I reckon I'd a got one.”

They all laughed, and Bob says:

“Why, Buck, they might have scalped us all, you've been so slow in
coming.”

“Well, nobody come after me, and it ain't right I'm always kept down; I
don't get no show.”

“Never mind, Buck, my boy,” says the old man, “you'll have show enough,
all in good time, don't you fret about that.  Go 'long with you now, and
do as your mother told you.”

When we got up-stairs to his room he got me a coarse shirt and a
roundabout and pants of his, and I put them on.  While I was at it he
asked me what my name was, but before I could tell him he started to
tell me about a bluejay and a young rabbit he had catched in the woods
day before yesterday, and he asked me where Moses was when the candle
went out.  I said I didn't know; I hadn't heard about it before, no way.

“Well, guess,” he says.

“How'm I going to guess,” says I, “when I never heard tell of it
before?”

“But you can guess, can't you?  It's just as easy.”

“_Which_ candle?”  I says.

“Why, any candle,” he says.

“I don't know where he was,” says I; “where was he?”

“Why, he was in the _dark_!  That's where he was!”

“Well, if you knowed where he was, what did you ask me for?”

“Why, blame it, it's a riddle, don't you see?  Say, how long are you
going to stay here?  You got to stay always.  We can just have booming
times--they don't have no school now.  Do you own a dog?  I've got a
dog--and he'll go in the river and bring out chips that you throw in.  Do
you like to comb up Sundays, and all that kind of foolishness?  You bet
I don't, but ma she makes me.  Confound these ole britches!  I reckon
I'd better put 'em on, but I'd ruther not, it's so warm.  Are you all
ready? All right.  Come along, old hoss.”

Cold corn-pone, cold corn-beef, butter and buttermilk--that is what they
had for me down there, and there ain't nothing better that ever I've
come across yet.  Buck and his ma and all of them smoked cob pipes,
except the nigger woman, which was gone, and the two young women.  They
all smoked and talked, and I eat and talked.  The young women had
quilts around them, and their hair down their backs.  They all asked me
questions, and I told them how pap and me and all the family was living
on a little farm down at the bottom of Arkansaw, and my sister Mary Ann
run off and got married and never was heard of no more, and Bill went
to hunt them and he warn't heard of no more, and Tom and Mort died,
and then there warn't nobody but just me and pap left, and he was just
trimmed down to nothing, on account of his troubles; so when he died
I took what there was left, because the farm didn't belong to us, and
started up the river, deck passage, and fell overboard; and that was how
I come to be here.  So they said I could have a home there as long as I
wanted it.  Then it was most daylight and everybody went to bed, and I
went to bed with Buck, and when I waked up in the morning, drat it all,
I had forgot what my name was. So I laid there about an hour trying to
think, and when Buck waked up I says:

“Can you spell, Buck?”

“Yes,” he says.

“I bet you can't spell my name,” says I.

“I bet you what you dare I can,” says he.

“All right,” says I, “go ahead.”

“G-e-o-r-g-e J-a-x-o-n--there now,” he says.

“Well,” says I, “you done it, but I didn't think you could.  It ain't no
slouch of a name to spell--right off without studying.”

I set it down, private, because somebody might want _me_ to spell it
next, and so I wanted to be handy with it and rattle it off like I was
used to it.

It was a mighty nice family, and a mighty nice house, too.  I hadn't
seen no house out in the country before that was so nice and had so much
style.  It didn't have an iron latch on the front door, nor a wooden one
with a buckskin string, but a brass knob to turn, the same as houses in
town. There warn't no bed in the parlor, nor a sign of a bed; but heaps
of parlors in towns has beds in them.  There was a big fireplace that
was bricked on the bottom, and the bricks was kept clean and red by
pouring water on them and scrubbing them with another brick; sometimes
they wash them over with red water-paint that they call Spanish-brown,
same as they do in town.  They had big brass dog-irons that could hold
up a saw-log. There was a clock on the middle of the mantelpiece, with
a picture of a town painted on the bottom half of the glass front, and
a round place in the middle of it for the sun, and you could see the
pendulum swinging behind it.  It was beautiful to hear that clock tick;
and sometimes when one of these peddlers had been along and scoured her
up and got her in good shape, she would start in and strike a hundred
and fifty before she got tuckered out.  They wouldn't took any money for
her.

Well, there was a big outlandish parrot on each side of the clock,
made out of something like chalk, and painted up gaudy.  By one of the
parrots was a cat made of crockery, and a crockery dog by the other;
and when you pressed down on them they squeaked, but didn't open
their mouths nor look different nor interested.  They squeaked through
underneath.  There was a couple of big wild-turkey-wing fans spread out
behind those things.  On the table in the middle of the room was a kind
of a lovely crockery basket that had apples and oranges and peaches and
grapes piled up in it, which was much redder and yellower and prettier
than real ones is, but they warn't real because you could see where
pieces had got chipped off and showed the white chalk, or whatever it
was, underneath.

This table had a cover made out of beautiful oilcloth, with a red and
blue spread-eagle painted on it, and a painted border all around.  It
come all the way from Philadelphia, they said.  There was some books,
too, piled up perfectly exact, on each corner of the table.  One was a
big family Bible full of pictures.  One was Pilgrim's Progress, about a
man that left his family, it didn't say why.  I read considerable in it
now and then.  The statements was interesting, but tough.  Another was
Friendship's Offering, full of beautiful stuff and poetry; but I didn't
read the poetry.  Another was Henry Clay's Speeches, and another was Dr.
Gunn's Family Medicine, which told you all about what to do if a body
was sick or dead.  There was a hymn book, and a lot of other books.  And
there was nice split-bottom chairs, and perfectly sound, too--not bagged
down in the middle and busted, like an old basket.

They had pictures hung on the walls--mainly Washingtons and Lafayettes,
and battles, and Highland Marys, and one called “Signing the
Declaration.” There was some that they called crayons, which one of the
daughters which was dead made her own self when she was only
fifteen years old.  They was different from any pictures I ever see
before--blacker, mostly, than is common.  One was a woman in a slim black
dress, belted small under the armpits, with bulges like a cabbage in
the middle of the sleeves, and a large black scoop-shovel bonnet with
a black veil, and white slim ankles crossed about with black tape, and
very wee black slippers, like a chisel, and she was leaning pensive on a
tombstone on her right elbow, under a weeping willow, and her other hand
hanging down her side holding a white handkerchief and a reticule,
and underneath the picture it said “Shall I Never See Thee More Alas.”
  Another one was a young lady with her hair all combed up straight
to the top of her head, and knotted there in front of a comb like a
chair-back, and she was crying into a handkerchief and had a dead bird
laying on its back in her other hand with its heels up, and underneath
the picture it said “I Shall Never Hear Thy Sweet Chirrup More Alas.”
  There was one where a young lady was at a window looking up at the
moon, and tears running down her cheeks; and she had an open letter in
one hand with black sealing wax showing on one edge of it, and she was
mashing a locket with a chain to it against her mouth, and underneath
the picture it said “And Art Thou Gone Yes Thou Art Gone Alas.”  These
was all nice pictures, I reckon, but I didn't somehow seem to take
to them, because if ever I was down a little they always give me the
fan-tods.  Everybody was sorry she died, because she had laid out a lot
more of these pictures to do, and a body could see by what she had done
what they had lost.  But I reckoned that with her disposition she was
having a better time in the graveyard.  She was at work on what they
said was her greatest picture when she took sick, and every day and
every night it was her prayer to be allowed to live till she got it
done, but she never got the chance.  It was a picture of a young woman
in a long white gown, standing on the rail of a bridge all ready to jump
off, with her hair all down her back, and looking up to the moon, with
the tears running down her face, and she had two arms folded across her
breast, and two arms stretched out in front, and two more reaching up
towards the moon--and the idea was to see which pair would look best,
and then scratch out all the other arms; but, as I was saying, she died
before she got her mind made up, and now they kept this picture over the
head of the bed in her room, and every time her birthday come they hung
flowers on it.  Other times it was hid with a little curtain.  The young
woman in the picture had a kind of a nice sweet face, but there was so
many arms it made her look too spidery, seemed to me.

This young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive, and used to paste
obituaries and accidents and cases of patient suffering in it out of the
Presbyterian Observer, and write poetry after them out of her own head.
It was very good poetry. This is what she wrote about a boy by the name
of Stephen Dowling Bots that fell down a well and was drownded:

ODE TO STEPHEN DOWLING BOTS, DEC'D

And did young Stephen sicken,    And did young Stephen die? And did the
sad hearts thicken,    And did the mourners cry?

No; such was not the fate of    Young Stephen Dowling Bots; Though sad
hearts round him thickened,    'Twas not from sickness' shots.

No whooping-cough did rack his frame,    Nor measles drear with spots;
Not these impaired the sacred name    Of Stephen Dowling Bots.

Despised love struck not with woe    That head of curly knots, Nor
stomach troubles laid him low,    Young Stephen Dowling Bots.

O no. Then list with tearful eye,    Whilst I his fate do tell. His soul
did from this cold world fly    By falling down a well.

They got him out and emptied him;    Alas it was too late; His spirit
was gone for to sport aloft    In the realms of the good and great.

If Emmeline Grangerford could make poetry like that before she was
fourteen, there ain't no telling what she could a done by and by.  Buck
said she could rattle off poetry like nothing.  She didn't ever have to
stop to think.  He said she would slap down a line, and if she couldn't
find anything to rhyme with it would just scratch it out and slap down
another one, and go ahead. She warn't particular; she could write about
anything you choose to give her to write about just so it was sadful.
Every time a man died, or a woman died, or a child died, she would be on
hand with her “tribute” before he was cold.  She called them tributes.
The neighbors said it was the doctor first, then Emmeline, then the
undertaker--the undertaker never got in ahead of Emmeline but once, and
then she hung fire on a rhyme for the dead person's name, which was
Whistler.  She warn't ever the same after that; she never complained,
but she kinder pined away and did not live long.  Poor thing, many's the
time I made myself go up to the little room that used to be hers and get
out her poor old scrap-book and read in it when her pictures had been
aggravating me and I had soured on her a little.  I liked all that
family, dead ones and all, and warn't going to let anything come between
us.  Poor Emmeline made poetry about all the dead people when she was
alive, and it didn't seem right that there warn't nobody to make some
about her now she was gone; so I tried to sweat out a verse or two
myself, but I couldn't seem to make it go somehow.  They kept Emmeline's
room trim and nice, and all the things fixed in it just the way she
liked to have them when she was alive, and nobody ever slept there.
 The old lady took care of the room herself, though there was plenty
of niggers, and she sewed there a good deal and read her Bible there
mostly.

Well, as I was saying about the parlor, there was beautiful curtains on
the windows:  white, with pictures painted on them of castles with vines
all down the walls, and cattle coming down to drink.  There was a little
old piano, too, that had tin pans in it, I reckon, and nothing was ever
so lovely as to hear the young ladies sing “The Last Link is Broken”
 and play “The Battle of Prague” on it.  The walls of all the rooms was
plastered, and most had carpets on the floors, and the whole house was
whitewashed on the outside.

It was a double house, and the big open place betwixt them was roofed
and floored, and sometimes the table was set there in the middle of the
day, and it was a cool, comfortable place.  Nothing couldn't be better.
 And warn't the cooking good, and just bushels of it too!




CHAPTER XVIII.

COL.  Grangerford was a gentleman, you see.  He was a gentleman all
over; and so was his family.  He was well born, as the saying is, and
that's worth as much in a man as it is in a horse, so the Widow Douglas
said, and nobody ever denied that she was of the first aristocracy
in our town; and pap he always said it, too, though he warn't no more
quality than a mudcat himself.  Col.  Grangerford was very tall and
very slim, and had a darkish-paly complexion, not a sign of red in it
anywheres; he was clean shaved every morning all over his thin face, and
he had the thinnest kind of lips, and the thinnest kind of nostrils, and
a high nose, and heavy eyebrows, and the blackest kind of eyes, sunk so
deep back that they seemed like they was looking out of caverns at
you, as you may say.  His forehead was high, and his hair was black and
straight and hung to his shoulders. His hands was long and thin, and
every day of his life he put on a clean shirt and a full suit from head
to foot made out of linen so white it hurt your eyes to look at it;
and on Sundays he wore a blue tail-coat with brass buttons on it.  He
carried a mahogany cane with a silver head to it.  There warn't no
frivolishness about him, not a bit, and he warn't ever loud.  He was
as kind as he could be--you could feel that, you know, and so you had
confidence.  Sometimes he smiled, and it was good to see; but when he
straightened himself up like a liberty-pole, and the lightning begun to
flicker out from under his eyebrows, you wanted to climb a tree first,
and find out what the matter was afterwards.  He didn't ever have to
tell anybody to mind their manners--everybody was always good-mannered
where he was.  Everybody loved to have him around, too; he was sunshine
most always--I mean he made it seem like good weather.  When he turned
into a cloudbank it was awful dark for half a minute, and that was
enough; there wouldn't nothing go wrong again for a week.

When him and the old lady come down in the morning all the family got
up out of their chairs and give them good-day, and didn't set down again
till they had set down.  Then Tom and Bob went to the sideboard where
the decanter was, and mixed a glass of bitters and handed it to him, and
he held it in his hand and waited till Tom's and Bob's was mixed, and
then they bowed and said, “Our duty to you, sir, and madam;” and _they_
bowed the least bit in the world and said thank you, and so they drank,
all three, and Bob and Tom poured a spoonful of water on the sugar and
the mite of whisky or apple brandy in the bottom of their tumblers, and
give it to me and Buck, and we drank to the old people too.

Bob was the oldest and Tom next--tall, beautiful men with very broad
shoulders and brown faces, and long black hair and black eyes.  They
dressed in white linen from head to foot, like the old gentleman, and
wore broad Panama hats.

Then there was Miss Charlotte; she was twenty-five, and tall and proud
and grand, but as good as she could be when she warn't stirred up; but
when she was she had a look that would make you wilt in your tracks,
like her father.  She was beautiful.

So was her sister, Miss Sophia, but it was a different kind.  She was
gentle and sweet like a dove, and she was only twenty.

Each person had their own nigger to wait on them--Buck too.  My nigger
had a monstrous easy time, because I warn't used to having anybody do
anything for me, but Buck's was on the jump most of the time.

This was all there was of the family now, but there used to be
more--three sons; they got killed; and Emmeline that died.

The old gentleman owned a lot of farms and over a hundred niggers.
Sometimes a stack of people would come there, horseback, from ten or
fifteen mile around, and stay five or six days, and have such junketings
round about and on the river, and dances and picnics in the woods
daytimes, and balls at the house nights.  These people was mostly
kinfolks of the family.  The men brought their guns with them.  It was a
handsome lot of quality, I tell you.

There was another clan of aristocracy around there--five or six
families--mostly of the name of Shepherdson.  They was as high-toned
and well born and rich and grand as the tribe of Grangerfords.  The
Shepherdsons and Grangerfords used the same steamboat landing, which was
about two mile above our house; so sometimes when I went up there with a
lot of our folks I used to see a lot of the Shepherdsons there on their
fine horses.

One day Buck and me was away out in the woods hunting, and heard a horse
coming.  We was crossing the road.  Buck says:

“Quick!  Jump for the woods!”

We done it, and then peeped down the woods through the leaves.  Pretty
soon a splendid young man come galloping down the road, setting his
horse easy and looking like a soldier.  He had his gun across his
pommel.  I had seen him before.  It was young Harney Shepherdson.  I
heard Buck's gun go off at my ear, and Harney's hat tumbled off from his
head.  He grabbed his gun and rode straight to the place where we was
hid.  But we didn't wait.  We started through the woods on a run.  The
woods warn't thick, so I looked over my shoulder to dodge the bullet,
and twice I seen Harney cover Buck with his gun; and then he rode away
the way he come--to get his hat, I reckon, but I couldn't see.  We never
stopped running till we got home.  The old gentleman's eyes blazed a
minute--'twas pleasure, mainly, I judged--then his face sort of smoothed
down, and he says, kind of gentle:

“I don't like that shooting from behind a bush.  Why didn't you step
into the road, my boy?”

“The Shepherdsons don't, father.  They always take advantage.”

Miss Charlotte she held her head up like a queen while Buck was telling
his tale, and her nostrils spread and her eyes snapped.  The two young
men looked dark, but never said nothing.  Miss Sophia she turned pale,
but the color come back when she found the man warn't hurt.

Soon as I could get Buck down by the corn-cribs under the trees by
ourselves, I says:

“Did you want to kill him, Buck?”

“Well, I bet I did.”

“What did he do to you?”

“Him?  He never done nothing to me.”

“Well, then, what did you want to kill him for?”

“Why, nothing--only it's on account of the feud.”

“What's a feud?”

“Why, where was you raised?  Don't you know what a feud is?”

“Never heard of it before--tell me about it.”

“Well,” says Buck, “a feud is this way:  A man has a quarrel with
another man, and kills him; then that other man's brother kills _him_;
then the other brothers, on both sides, goes for one another; then the
_cousins_ chip in--and by and by everybody's killed off, and there ain't
no more feud.  But it's kind of slow, and takes a long time.”

“Has this one been going on long, Buck?”

“Well, I should _reckon_!  It started thirty year ago, or som'ers along
there.  There was trouble 'bout something, and then a lawsuit to settle
it; and the suit went agin one of the men, and so he up and shot the
man that won the suit--which he would naturally do, of course.  Anybody
would.”

“What was the trouble about, Buck?--land?”

“I reckon maybe--I don't know.”

“Well, who done the shooting?  Was it a Grangerford or a Shepherdson?”

“Laws, how do I know?  It was so long ago.”

“Don't anybody know?”

“Oh, yes, pa knows, I reckon, and some of the other old people; but they
don't know now what the row was about in the first place.”

“Has there been many killed, Buck?”

“Yes; right smart chance of funerals.  But they don't always kill.  Pa's
got a few buckshot in him; but he don't mind it 'cuz he don't weigh
much, anyway.  Bob's been carved up some with a bowie, and Tom's been
hurt once or twice.”

“Has anybody been killed this year, Buck?”

“Yes; we got one and they got one.  'Bout three months ago my cousin
Bud, fourteen year old, was riding through the woods on t'other side
of the river, and didn't have no weapon with him, which was blame'
foolishness, and in a lonesome place he hears a horse a-coming behind
him, and sees old Baldy Shepherdson a-linkin' after him with his gun in
his hand and his white hair a-flying in the wind; and 'stead of jumping
off and taking to the brush, Bud 'lowed he could out-run him; so they
had it, nip and tuck, for five mile or more, the old man a-gaining all
the time; so at last Bud seen it warn't any use, so he stopped and faced
around so as to have the bullet holes in front, you know, and the old
man he rode up and shot him down.  But he didn't git much chance to
enjoy his luck, for inside of a week our folks laid _him_ out.”

“I reckon that old man was a coward, Buck.”

“I reckon he _warn't_ a coward.  Not by a blame' sight.  There ain't a
coward amongst them Shepherdsons--not a one.  And there ain't no cowards
amongst the Grangerfords either.  Why, that old man kep' up his end in a
fight one day for half an hour against three Grangerfords, and come
out winner.  They was all a-horseback; he lit off of his horse and got
behind a little woodpile, and kep' his horse before him to stop the
bullets; but the Grangerfords stayed on their horses and capered around
the old man, and peppered away at him, and he peppered away at them.
 Him and his horse both went home pretty leaky and crippled, but the
Grangerfords had to be _fetched_ home--and one of 'em was dead, and
another died the next day.  No, sir; if a body's out hunting for cowards
he don't want to fool away any time amongst them Shepherdsons, becuz
they don't breed any of that _kind_.”

Next Sunday we all went to church, about three mile, everybody
a-horseback. The men took their guns along, so did Buck, and kept
them between their knees or stood them handy against the wall.  The
Shepherdsons done the same.  It was pretty ornery preaching--all about
brotherly love, and such-like tiresomeness; but everybody said it was
a good sermon, and they all talked it over going home, and had such
a powerful lot to say about faith and good works and free grace and
preforeordestination, and I don't know what all, that it did seem to me
to be one of the roughest Sundays I had run across yet.

About an hour after dinner everybody was dozing around, some in their
chairs and some in their rooms, and it got to be pretty dull.  Buck and
a dog was stretched out on the grass in the sun sound asleep.  I went up
to our room, and judged I would take a nap myself.  I found that sweet
Miss Sophia standing in her door, which was next to ours, and she took
me in her room and shut the door very soft, and asked me if I liked her,
and I said I did; and she asked me if I would do something for her and
not tell anybody, and I said I would.  Then she said she'd forgot her
Testament, and left it in the seat at church between two other books,
and would I slip out quiet and go there and fetch it to her, and not say
nothing to nobody.  I said I would. So I slid out and slipped off up the
road, and there warn't anybody at the church, except maybe a hog or two,
for there warn't any lock on the door, and hogs likes a puncheon floor
in summer-time because it's cool.  If you notice, most folks don't go to
church only when they've got to; but a hog is different.

Says I to myself, something's up; it ain't natural for a girl to be in
such a sweat about a Testament.  So I give it a shake, and out drops a
little piece of paper with “HALF-PAST TWO” wrote on it with a pencil.  I
ransacked it, but couldn't find anything else.  I couldn't make anything
out of that, so I put the paper in the book again, and when I got home
and upstairs there was Miss Sophia in her door waiting for me.  She
pulled me in and shut the door; then she looked in the Testament till
she found the paper, and as soon as she read it she looked glad; and
before a body could think she grabbed me and give me a squeeze, and
said I was the best boy in the world, and not to tell anybody.  She was
mighty red in the face for a minute, and her eyes lighted up, and it
made her powerful pretty.  I was a good deal astonished, but when I got
my breath I asked her what the paper was about, and she asked me if I
had read it, and I said no, and she asked me if I could read writing,
and I told her “no, only coarse-hand,” and then she said the paper
warn't anything but a book-mark to keep her place, and I might go and
play now.

I went off down to the river, studying over this thing, and pretty soon
I noticed that my nigger was following along behind.  When we was out
of sight of the house he looked back and around a second, and then comes
a-running, and says:

“Mars Jawge, if you'll come down into de swamp I'll show you a whole
stack o' water-moccasins.”

Thinks I, that's mighty curious; he said that yesterday.  He oughter
know a body don't love water-moccasins enough to go around hunting for
them. What is he up to, anyway?  So I says:

“All right; trot ahead.”

I followed a half a mile; then he struck out over the swamp, and waded
ankle deep as much as another half-mile.  We come to a little flat piece
of land which was dry and very thick with trees and bushes and vines,
and he says:

“You shove right in dah jist a few steps, Mars Jawge; dah's whah dey is.
I's seed 'm befo'; I don't k'yer to see 'em no mo'.”

Then he slopped right along and went away, and pretty soon the trees hid
him.  I poked into the place a-ways and come to a little open patch
as big as a bedroom all hung around with vines, and found a man laying
there asleep--and, by jings, it was my old Jim!

I waked him up, and I reckoned it was going to be a grand surprise to
him to see me again, but it warn't.  He nearly cried he was so glad, but
he warn't surprised.  Said he swum along behind me that night, and heard
me yell every time, but dasn't answer, because he didn't want nobody to
pick _him_ up and take him into slavery again.  Says he:

“I got hurt a little, en couldn't swim fas', so I wuz a considable ways
behine you towards de las'; when you landed I reck'ned I could ketch
up wid you on de lan' 'dout havin' to shout at you, but when I see dat
house I begin to go slow.  I 'uz off too fur to hear what dey say to
you--I wuz 'fraid o' de dogs; but when it 'uz all quiet agin I knowed
you's in de house, so I struck out for de woods to wait for day.  Early
in de mawnin' some er de niggers come along, gwyne to de fields, en dey
tuk me en showed me dis place, whah de dogs can't track me on accounts
o' de water, en dey brings me truck to eat every night, en tells me how
you's a-gitt'n along.”

“Why didn't you tell my Jack to fetch me here sooner, Jim?”

“Well, 'twarn't no use to 'sturb you, Huck, tell we could do sumfn--but
we's all right now.  I ben a-buyin' pots en pans en vittles, as I got a
chanst, en a-patchin' up de raf' nights when--”

“_What_ raft, Jim?”

“Our ole raf'.”

“You mean to say our old raft warn't smashed all to flinders?”

“No, she warn't.  She was tore up a good deal--one en' of her was; but
dey warn't no great harm done, on'y our traps was mos' all los'.  Ef we
hadn' dive' so deep en swum so fur under water, en de night hadn' ben
so dark, en we warn't so sk'yerd, en ben sich punkin-heads, as de sayin'
is, we'd a seed de raf'.  But it's jis' as well we didn't, 'kase now
she's all fixed up agin mos' as good as new, en we's got a new lot o'
stuff, in de place o' what 'uz los'.”

“Why, how did you get hold of the raft again, Jim--did you catch her?”

“How I gwyne to ketch her en I out in de woods?  No; some er de niggers
foun' her ketched on a snag along heah in de ben', en dey hid her in a
crick 'mongst de willows, en dey wuz so much jawin' 'bout which un 'um
she b'long to de mos' dat I come to heah 'bout it pooty soon, so I ups
en settles de trouble by tellin' 'um she don't b'long to none uv um, but
to you en me; en I ast 'm if dey gwyne to grab a young white genlman's
propaty, en git a hid'n for it?  Den I gin 'm ten cents apiece, en dey
'uz mighty well satisfied, en wisht some mo' raf's 'ud come along en
make 'm rich agin. Dey's mighty good to me, dese niggers is, en whatever
I wants 'm to do fur me I doan' have to ast 'm twice, honey.  Dat Jack's
a good nigger, en pooty smart.”

“Yes, he is.  He ain't ever told me you was here; told me to come, and
he'd show me a lot of water-moccasins.  If anything happens _he_ ain't
mixed up in it.  He can say he never seen us together, and it 'll be the
truth.”

I don't want to talk much about the next day.  I reckon I'll cut it
pretty short.  I waked up about dawn, and was a-going to turn over and
go to sleep again when I noticed how still it was--didn't seem to be
anybody stirring.  That warn't usual.  Next I noticed that Buck was
up and gone. Well, I gets up, a-wondering, and goes down stairs--nobody
around; everything as still as a mouse.  Just the same outside.  Thinks
I, what does it mean?  Down by the wood-pile I comes across my Jack, and
says:

“What's it all about?”

Says he:

“Don't you know, Mars Jawge?”

“No,” says I, “I don't.”

“Well, den, Miss Sophia's run off! 'deed she has.  She run off in de
night some time--nobody don't know jis' when; run off to get married
to dat young Harney Shepherdson, you know--leastways, so dey 'spec.  De
fambly foun' it out 'bout half an hour ago--maybe a little mo'--en' I
_tell_ you dey warn't no time los'.  Sich another hurryin' up guns
en hosses _you_ never see!  De women folks has gone for to stir up de
relations, en ole Mars Saul en de boys tuck dey guns en rode up de
river road for to try to ketch dat young man en kill him 'fo' he kin
git acrost de river wid Miss Sophia.  I reck'n dey's gwyne to be mighty
rough times.”

“Buck went off 'thout waking me up.”

“Well, I reck'n he _did_!  Dey warn't gwyne to mix you up in it.
 Mars Buck he loaded up his gun en 'lowed he's gwyne to fetch home a
Shepherdson or bust. Well, dey'll be plenty un 'm dah, I reck'n, en you
bet you he'll fetch one ef he gits a chanst.”

I took up the river road as hard as I could put.  By and by I begin to
hear guns a good ways off.  When I come in sight of the log store and
the woodpile where the steamboats lands I worked along under the trees
and brush till I got to a good place, and then I clumb up into the
forks of a cottonwood that was out of reach, and watched.  There was a
wood-rank four foot high a little ways in front of the tree, and first I
was going to hide behind that; but maybe it was luckier I didn't.

There was four or five men cavorting around on their horses in the open
place before the log store, cussing and yelling, and trying to get at
a couple of young chaps that was behind the wood-rank alongside of the
steamboat landing; but they couldn't come it.  Every time one of them
showed himself on the river side of the woodpile he got shot at.  The
two boys was squatting back to back behind the pile, so they could watch
both ways.

By and by the men stopped cavorting around and yelling.  They started
riding towards the store; then up gets one of the boys, draws a steady
bead over the wood-rank, and drops one of them out of his saddle.  All
the men jumped off of their horses and grabbed the hurt one and started
to carry him to the store; and that minute the two boys started on the
run.  They got half way to the tree I was in before the men noticed.
Then the men see them, and jumped on their horses and took out after
them.  They gained on the boys, but it didn't do no good, the boys had
too good a start; they got to the woodpile that was in front of my tree,
and slipped in behind it, and so they had the bulge on the men again.
One of the boys was Buck, and the other was a slim young chap about
nineteen years old.

The men ripped around awhile, and then rode away.  As soon as they was
out of sight I sung out to Buck and told him.  He didn't know what
to make of my voice coming out of the tree at first.  He was awful
surprised.  He told me to watch out sharp and let him know when the
men come in sight again; said they was up to some devilment or
other--wouldn't be gone long.  I wished I was out of that tree, but I
dasn't come down.  Buck begun to cry and rip, and 'lowed that him and
his cousin Joe (that was the other young chap) would make up for this
day yet.  He said his father and his two brothers was killed, and two
or three of the enemy.  Said the Shepherdsons laid for them in
ambush.  Buck said his father and brothers ought to waited for their
relations--the Shepherdsons was too strong for them.  I asked him what
was become of young Harney and Miss Sophia.  He said they'd got across
the river and was safe.  I was glad of that; but the way Buck did take
on because he didn't manage to kill Harney that day he shot at him--I
hain't ever heard anything like it.

All of a sudden, bang! bang! bang! goes three or four guns--the men had
slipped around through the woods and come in from behind without their
horses!  The boys jumped for the river--both of them hurt--and as they
swum down the current the men run along the bank shooting at them and
singing out, “Kill them, kill them!”  It made me so sick I most fell out
of the tree.  I ain't a-going to tell _all_ that happened--it would make
me sick again if I was to do that.  I wished I hadn't ever come ashore
that night to see such things.  I ain't ever going to get shut of
them--lots of times I dream about them.

I stayed in the tree till it begun to get dark, afraid to come down.
Sometimes I heard guns away off in the woods; and twice I seen little
gangs of men gallop past the log store with guns; so I reckoned the
trouble was still a-going on.  I was mighty downhearted; so I made up my
mind I wouldn't ever go anear that house again, because I reckoned I
was to blame, somehow. I judged that that piece of paper meant that Miss
Sophia was to meet Harney somewheres at half-past two and run off; and
I judged I ought to told her father about that paper and the curious way
she acted, and then maybe he would a locked her up, and this awful mess
wouldn't ever happened.

When I got down out of the tree I crept along down the river bank a
piece, and found the two bodies laying in the edge of the water, and
tugged at them till I got them ashore; then I covered up their faces,
and got away as quick as I could.  I cried a little when I was covering
up Buck's face, for he was mighty good to me.

It was just dark now.  I never went near the house, but struck through
the woods and made for the swamp.  Jim warn't on his island, so I
tramped off in a hurry for the crick, and crowded through the willows,
red-hot to jump aboard and get out of that awful country.  The raft was
gone!  My souls, but I was scared!  I couldn't get my breath for most
a minute. Then I raised a yell.  A voice not twenty-five foot from me
says:

“Good lan'! is dat you, honey?  Doan' make no noise.”

It was Jim's voice--nothing ever sounded so good before.  I run along the
bank a piece and got aboard, and Jim he grabbed me and hugged me, he was
so glad to see me.  He says:

“Laws bless you, chile, I 'uz right down sho' you's dead agin.  Jack's
been heah; he say he reck'n you's ben shot, kase you didn' come home no
mo'; so I's jes' dis minute a startin' de raf' down towards de mouf er
de crick, so's to be all ready for to shove out en leave soon as Jack
comes agin en tells me for certain you _is_ dead.  Lawsy, I's mighty
glad to git you back again, honey.”

I says:

“All right--that's mighty good; they won't find me, and they'll think
I've been killed, and floated down the river--there's something up there
that 'll help them think so--so don't you lose no time, Jim, but just
shove off for the big water as fast as ever you can.”

I never felt easy till the raft was two mile below there and out in
the middle of the Mississippi.  Then we hung up our signal lantern, and
judged that we was free and safe once more.  I hadn't had a bite to eat
since yesterday, so Jim he got out some corn-dodgers and buttermilk,
and pork and cabbage and greens--there ain't nothing in the world so good
when it's cooked right--and whilst I eat my supper we talked and had a
good time.  I was powerful glad to get away from the feuds, and so was
Jim to get away from the swamp.  We said there warn't no home like a
raft, after all.  Other places do seem so cramped up and smothery, but a
raft don't.  You feel mighty free and easy and comfortable on a raft.




CHAPTER XIX.

TWO or three days and nights went by; I reckon I might say they swum by,
they slid along so quiet and smooth and lovely.  Here is the way we put
in the time.  It was a monstrous big river down there--sometimes a mile
and a half wide; we run nights, and laid up and hid daytimes; soon as
night was most gone we stopped navigating and tied up--nearly always
in the dead water under a towhead; and then cut young cottonwoods and
willows, and hid the raft with them.  Then we set out the lines.  Next
we slid into the river and had a swim, so as to freshen up and cool
off; then we set down on the sandy bottom where the water was about knee
deep, and watched the daylight come.  Not a sound anywheres--perfectly
still--just like the whole world was asleep, only sometimes the bullfrogs
a-cluttering, maybe.  The first thing to see, looking away over the
water, was a kind of dull line--that was the woods on t'other side; you
couldn't make nothing else out; then a pale place in the sky; then more
paleness spreading around; then the river softened up away off, and
warn't black any more, but gray; you could see little dark spots
drifting along ever so far away--trading scows, and such things; and
long black streaks--rafts; sometimes you could hear a sweep screaking; or
jumbled up voices, it was so still, and sounds come so far; and by and
by you could see a streak on the water which you know by the look of the
streak that there's a snag there in a swift current which breaks on it
and makes that streak look that way; and you see the mist curl up off
of the water, and the east reddens up, and the river, and you make out a
log-cabin in the edge of the woods, away on the bank on t'other side of
the river, being a woodyard, likely, and piled by them cheats so you can
throw a dog through it anywheres; then the nice breeze springs up, and
comes fanning you from over there, so cool and fresh and sweet to smell
on account of the woods and the flowers; but sometimes not that way,
because they've left dead fish laying around, gars and such, and they
do get pretty rank; and next you've got the full day, and everything
smiling in the sun, and the song-birds just going it!

A little smoke couldn't be noticed now, so we would take some fish off
of the lines and cook up a hot breakfast.  And afterwards we would watch
the lonesomeness of the river, and kind of lazy along, and by and by
lazy off to sleep.  Wake up by and by, and look to see what done it, and
maybe see a steamboat coughing along up-stream, so far off towards the
other side you couldn't tell nothing about her only whether she was
a stern-wheel or side-wheel; then for about an hour there wouldn't be
nothing to hear nor nothing to see--just solid lonesomeness.  Next
you'd see a raft sliding by, away off yonder, and maybe a galoot on it
chopping, because they're most always doing it on a raft; you'd see the
axe flash and come down--you don't hear nothing; you see that axe go
up again, and by the time it's above the man's head then you hear the
_k'chunk_!--it had took all that time to come over the water.  So we
would put in the day, lazying around, listening to the stillness.  Once
there was a thick fog, and the rafts and things that went by was beating
tin pans so the steamboats wouldn't run over them.  A scow or a
raft went by so close we could hear them talking and cussing and
laughing--heard them plain; but we couldn't see no sign of them; it made
you feel crawly; it was like spirits carrying on that way in the air.
 Jim said he believed it was spirits; but I says:

“No; spirits wouldn't say, 'Dern the dern fog.'”

Soon as it was night out we shoved; when we got her out to about the
middle we let her alone, and let her float wherever the current wanted
her to; then we lit the pipes, and dangled our legs in the water, and
talked about all kinds of things--we was always naked, day and night,
whenever the mosquitoes would let us--the new clothes Buck's folks made
for me was too good to be comfortable, and besides I didn't go much on
clothes, nohow.

Sometimes we'd have that whole river all to ourselves for the longest
time. Yonder was the banks and the islands, across the water; and maybe
a spark--which was a candle in a cabin window; and sometimes on the water
you could see a spark or two--on a raft or a scow, you know; and maybe
you could hear a fiddle or a song coming over from one of them crafts.
It's lovely to live on a raft.  We had the sky up there, all speckled
with stars, and we used to lay on our backs and look up at them, and
discuss about whether they was made or only just happened.  Jim he
allowed they was made, but I allowed they happened; I judged it would
have took too long to _make_ so many.  Jim said the moon could a _laid_
them; well, that looked kind of reasonable, so I didn't say nothing
against it, because I've seen a frog lay most as many, so of course it
could be done. We used to watch the stars that fell, too, and see them
streak down.  Jim allowed they'd got spoiled and was hove out of the
nest.

Once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slipping along in the
dark, and now and then she would belch a whole world of sparks up out
of her chimbleys, and they would rain down in the river and look awful
pretty; then she would turn a corner and her lights would wink out and
her powwow shut off and leave the river still again; and by and by her
waves would get to us, a long time after she was gone, and joggle the
raft a bit, and after that you wouldn't hear nothing for you couldn't
tell how long, except maybe frogs or something.

After midnight the people on shore went to bed, and then for two or
three hours the shores was black--no more sparks in the cabin windows.
 These sparks was our clock--the first one that showed again meant
morning was coming, so we hunted a place to hide and tie up right away.

One morning about daybreak I found a canoe and crossed over a chute to
the main shore--it was only two hundred yards--and paddled about a mile
up a crick amongst the cypress woods, to see if I couldn't get some
berries. Just as I was passing a place where a kind of a cowpath crossed
the crick, here comes a couple of men tearing up the path as tight as
they could foot it.  I thought I was a goner, for whenever anybody was
after anybody I judged it was _me_--or maybe Jim.  I was about to dig out
from there in a hurry, but they was pretty close to me then, and sung
out and begged me to save their lives--said they hadn't been doing
nothing, and was being chased for it--said there was men and dogs
a-coming.  They wanted to jump right in, but I says:

“Don't you do it.  I don't hear the dogs and horses yet; you've got time
to crowd through the brush and get up the crick a little ways; then you
take to the water and wade down to me and get in--that'll throw the dogs
off the scent.”

They done it, and soon as they was aboard I lit out for our towhead,
and in about five or ten minutes we heard the dogs and the men away off,
shouting. We heard them come along towards the crick, but couldn't
see them; they seemed to stop and fool around a while; then, as we got
further and further away all the time, we couldn't hardly hear them at
all; by the time we had left a mile of woods behind us and struck the
river, everything was quiet, and we paddled over to the towhead and hid
in the cottonwoods and was safe.

One of these fellows was about seventy or upwards, and had a bald head
and very gray whiskers.  He had an old battered-up slouch hat on, and
a greasy blue woollen shirt, and ragged old blue jeans britches stuffed
into his boot-tops, and home-knit galluses--no, he only had one.  He had
an old long-tailed blue jeans coat with slick brass buttons flung over
his arm, and both of them had big, fat, ratty-looking carpet-bags.

The other fellow was about thirty, and dressed about as ornery.  After
breakfast we all laid off and talked, and the first thing that come out
was that these chaps didn't know one another.

“What got you into trouble?” says the baldhead to t'other chap.

“Well, I'd been selling an article to take the tartar off the teeth--and
it does take it off, too, and generly the enamel along with it--but I
stayed about one night longer than I ought to, and was just in the act
of sliding out when I ran across you on the trail this side of town, and
you told me they were coming, and begged me to help you to get off.  So
I told you I was expecting trouble myself, and would scatter out _with_
you. That's the whole yarn--what's yourn?

“Well, I'd ben a-running' a little temperance revival thar 'bout a week,
and was the pet of the women folks, big and little, for I was makin' it
mighty warm for the rummies, I _tell_ you, and takin' as much as five
or six dollars a night--ten cents a head, children and niggers free--and
business a-growin' all the time, when somehow or another a little report
got around last night that I had a way of puttin' in my time with a
private jug on the sly.  A nigger rousted me out this mornin', and told
me the people was getherin' on the quiet with their dogs and horses, and
they'd be along pretty soon and give me 'bout half an hour's start,
and then run me down if they could; and if they got me they'd tar
and feather me and ride me on a rail, sure.  I didn't wait for no
breakfast--I warn't hungry.”

“Old man,” said the young one, “I reckon we might double-team it
together; what do you think?”

“I ain't undisposed.  What's your line--mainly?”

“Jour printer by trade; do a little in patent medicines;
theater-actor--tragedy, you know; take a turn to mesmerism and phrenology
when there's a chance; teach singing-geography school for a change;
sling a lecture sometimes--oh, I do lots of things--most anything that
comes handy, so it ain't work.  What's your lay?”

“I've done considerble in the doctoring way in my time.  Layin' on o'
hands is my best holt--for cancer and paralysis, and sich things; and I
k'n tell a fortune pretty good when I've got somebody along to find out
the facts for me.  Preachin's my line, too, and workin' camp-meetin's,
and missionaryin' around.”

Nobody never said anything for a while; then the young man hove a sigh
and says:

“Alas!”

“What 're you alassin' about?” says the bald-head.

“To think I should have lived to be leading such a life, and be degraded
down into such company.”  And he begun to wipe the corner of his eye
with a rag.

“Dern your skin, ain't the company good enough for you?” says the
baldhead, pretty pert and uppish.

“Yes, it _is_ good enough for me; it's as good as I deserve; for who
fetched me so low when I was so high?  I did myself.  I don't blame
_you_, gentlemen--far from it; I don't blame anybody.  I deserve it
all.  Let the cold world do its worst; one thing I know--there's a grave
somewhere for me. The world may go on just as it's always done, and take
everything from me--loved ones, property, everything; but it can't take
that. Some day I'll lie down in it and forget it all, and my poor broken
heart will be at rest.”  He went on a-wiping.

“Drot your pore broken heart,” says the baldhead; “what are you heaving
your pore broken heart at _us_ f'r?  _we_ hain't done nothing.”

“No, I know you haven't.  I ain't blaming you, gentlemen.  I brought
myself down--yes, I did it myself.  It's right I should suffer--perfectly
right--I don't make any moan.”

“Brought you down from whar?  Whar was you brought down from?”

“Ah, you would not believe me; the world never believes--let it pass--'tis
no matter.  The secret of my birth--”

“The secret of your birth!  Do you mean to say--”

“Gentlemen,” says the young man, very solemn, “I will reveal it to you,
for I feel I may have confidence in you.  By rights I am a duke!”

Jim's eyes bugged out when he heard that; and I reckon mine did, too.
Then the baldhead says:  “No! you can't mean it?”

“Yes.  My great-grandfather, eldest son of the Duke of Bridgewater, fled
to this country about the end of the last century, to breathe the pure
air of freedom; married here, and died, leaving a son, his own father
dying about the same time.  The second son of the late duke seized the
titles and estates--the infant real duke was ignored.  I am the lineal
descendant of that infant--I am the rightful Duke of Bridgewater; and
here am I, forlorn, torn from my high estate, hunted of men, despised
by the cold world, ragged, worn, heart-broken, and degraded to the
companionship of felons on a raft!”

Jim pitied him ever so much, and so did I. We tried to comfort him, but
he said it warn't much use, he couldn't be much comforted; said if we
was a mind to acknowledge him, that would do him more good than most
anything else; so we said we would, if he would tell us how.  He said we
ought to bow when we spoke to him, and say “Your Grace,” or “My Lord,”
 or “Your Lordship”--and he wouldn't mind it if we called him plain
“Bridgewater,” which, he said, was a title anyway, and not a name; and
one of us ought to wait on him at dinner, and do any little thing for
him he wanted done.

Well, that was all easy, so we done it.  All through dinner Jim stood
around and waited on him, and says, “Will yo' Grace have some o' dis or
some o' dat?” and so on, and a body could see it was mighty pleasing to
him.

But the old man got pretty silent by and by--didn't have much to say, and
didn't look pretty comfortable over all that petting that was going on
around that duke.  He seemed to have something on his mind.  So, along
in the afternoon, he says:

“Looky here, Bilgewater,” he says, “I'm nation sorry for you, but you
ain't the only person that's had troubles like that.”

“No?”

“No you ain't.  You ain't the only person that's ben snaked down
wrongfully out'n a high place.”

“Alas!”

“No, you ain't the only person that's had a secret of his birth.”  And,
by jings, _he_ begins to cry.

“Hold!  What do you mean?”

“Bilgewater, kin I trust you?” says the old man, still sort of sobbing.

“To the bitter death!”  He took the old man by the hand and squeezed it,
and says, “That secret of your being:  speak!”

“Bilgewater, I am the late Dauphin!”

You bet you, Jim and me stared this time.  Then the duke says:

“You are what?”

“Yes, my friend, it is too true--your eyes is lookin' at this very moment
on the pore disappeared Dauphin, Looy the Seventeen, son of Looy the
Sixteen and Marry Antonette.”

“You!  At your age!  No!  You mean you're the late Charlemagne; you must
be six or seven hundred years old, at the very least.”

“Trouble has done it, Bilgewater, trouble has done it; trouble has brung
these gray hairs and this premature balditude.  Yes, gentlemen, you
see before you, in blue jeans and misery, the wanderin', exiled,
trampled-on, and sufferin' rightful King of France.”

Well, he cried and took on so that me and Jim didn't know hardly what to
do, we was so sorry--and so glad and proud we'd got him with us, too.
 So we set in, like we done before with the duke, and tried to comfort
_him_. But he said it warn't no use, nothing but to be dead and done
with it all could do him any good; though he said it often made him feel
easier and better for a while if people treated him according to his
rights, and got down on one knee to speak to him, and always called him
“Your Majesty,” and waited on him first at meals, and didn't set down
in his presence till he asked them. So Jim and me set to majestying him,
and doing this and that and t'other for him, and standing up till he
told us we might set down.  This done him heaps of good, and so he
got cheerful and comfortable.  But the duke kind of soured on him, and
didn't look a bit satisfied with the way things was going; still,
the king acted real friendly towards him, and said the duke's
great-grandfather and all the other Dukes of Bilgewater was a good
deal thought of by _his_ father, and was allowed to come to the palace
considerable; but the duke stayed huffy a good while, till by and by the
king says:

“Like as not we got to be together a blamed long time on this h-yer
raft, Bilgewater, and so what's the use o' your bein' sour?  It 'll only
make things oncomfortable.  It ain't my fault I warn't born a duke,
it ain't your fault you warn't born a king--so what's the use to worry?
 Make the best o' things the way you find 'em, says I--that's my motto.
 This ain't no bad thing that we've struck here--plenty grub and an easy
life--come, give us your hand, duke, and le's all be friends.”

The duke done it, and Jim and me was pretty glad to see it.  It took
away all the uncomfortableness and we felt mighty good over it, because
it would a been a miserable business to have any unfriendliness on the
raft; for what you want, above all things, on a raft, is for everybody
to be satisfied, and feel right and kind towards the others.

It didn't take me long to make up my mind that these liars warn't no
kings nor dukes at all, but just low-down humbugs and frauds.  But I
never said nothing, never let on; kept it to myself; it's the best way;
then you don't have no quarrels, and don't get into no trouble.  If they
wanted us to call them kings and dukes, I hadn't no objections, 'long as
it would keep peace in the family; and it warn't no use to tell Jim, so
I didn't tell him.  If I never learnt nothing else out of pap, I learnt
that the best way to get along with his kind of people is to let them
have their own way.




CHAPTER XX.

THEY asked us considerable many questions; wanted to know what we
covered up the raft that way for, and laid by in the daytime instead of
running--was Jim a runaway nigger?  Says I:

“Goodness sakes! would a runaway nigger run _south_?”

No, they allowed he wouldn't.  I had to account for things some way, so
I says:

“My folks was living in Pike County, in Missouri, where I was born, and
they all died off but me and pa and my brother Ike.  Pa, he 'lowed
he'd break up and go down and live with Uncle Ben, who's got a little
one-horse place on the river, forty-four mile below Orleans.  Pa was
pretty poor, and had some debts; so when he'd squared up there warn't
nothing left but sixteen dollars and our nigger, Jim.  That warn't
enough to take us fourteen hundred mile, deck passage nor no other way.
 Well, when the river rose pa had a streak of luck one day; he ketched
this piece of a raft; so we reckoned we'd go down to Orleans on it.
 Pa's luck didn't hold out; a steamboat run over the forrard corner of
the raft one night, and we all went overboard and dove under the wheel;
Jim and me come up all right, but pa was drunk, and Ike was only four
years old, so they never come up no more.  Well, for the next day or
two we had considerable trouble, because people was always coming out in
skiffs and trying to take Jim away from me, saying they believed he was
a runaway nigger.  We don't run daytimes no more now; nights they don't
bother us.”

The duke says:

“Leave me alone to cipher out a way so we can run in the daytime if we
want to.  I'll think the thing over--I'll invent a plan that'll fix it.
We'll let it alone for to-day, because of course we don't want to go by
that town yonder in daylight--it mightn't be healthy.”

Towards night it begun to darken up and look like rain; the heat
lightning was squirting around low down in the sky, and the leaves was
beginning to shiver--it was going to be pretty ugly, it was easy to see
that.  So the duke and the king went to overhauling our wigwam, to see
what the beds was like.  My bed was a straw tick better than Jim's,
which was a corn-shuck tick; there's always cobs around about in a shuck
tick, and they poke into you and hurt; and when you roll over the dry
shucks sound like you was rolling over in a pile of dead leaves; it
makes such a rustling that you wake up.  Well, the duke allowed he would
take my bed; but the king allowed he wouldn't.  He says:

“I should a reckoned the difference in rank would a sejested to you that
a corn-shuck bed warn't just fitten for me to sleep on.  Your Grace 'll
take the shuck bed yourself.”

Jim and me was in a sweat again for a minute, being afraid there was
going to be some more trouble amongst them; so we was pretty glad when
the duke says:

“'Tis my fate to be always ground into the mire under the iron heel of
oppression.  Misfortune has broken my once haughty spirit; I yield, I
submit; 'tis my fate.  I am alone in the world--let me suffer; can bear
it.”

We got away as soon as it was good and dark.  The king told us to stand
well out towards the middle of the river, and not show a light till we
got a long ways below the town.  We come in sight of the little bunch of
lights by and by--that was the town, you know--and slid by, about a half
a mile out, all right.  When we was three-quarters of a mile below we
hoisted up our signal lantern; and about ten o'clock it come on to rain
and blow and thunder and lighten like everything; so the king told us
to both stay on watch till the weather got better; then him and the duke
crawled into the wigwam and turned in for the night.  It was my watch
below till twelve, but I wouldn't a turned in anyway if I'd had a bed,
because a body don't see such a storm as that every day in the week, not
by a long sight.  My souls, how the wind did scream along!  And every
second or two there'd come a glare that lit up the white-caps for a half
a mile around, and you'd see the islands looking dusty through the rain,
and the trees thrashing around in the wind; then comes a H-WHACK!--bum!
bum! bumble-umble-um-bum-bum-bum-bum--and the thunder would go rumbling
and grumbling away, and quit--and then RIP comes another flash and
another sockdolager.  The waves most washed me off the raft sometimes,
but I hadn't any clothes on, and didn't mind.  We didn't have no trouble
about snags; the lightning was glaring and flittering around so constant
that we could see them plenty soon enough to throw her head this way or
that and miss them.

I had the middle watch, you know, but I was pretty sleepy by that time,
so Jim he said he would stand the first half of it for me; he was always
mighty good that way, Jim was.  I crawled into the wigwam, but the king
and the duke had their legs sprawled around so there warn't no show for
me; so I laid outside--I didn't mind the rain, because it was warm, and
the waves warn't running so high now.  About two they come up again,
though, and Jim was going to call me; but he changed his mind, because
he reckoned they warn't high enough yet to do any harm; but he was
mistaken about that, for pretty soon all of a sudden along comes a
regular ripper and washed me overboard.  It most killed Jim a-laughing.
 He was the easiest nigger to laugh that ever was, anyway.

I took the watch, and Jim he laid down and snored away; and by and by
the storm let up for good and all; and the first cabin-light that showed
I rousted him out, and we slid the raft into hiding quarters for the
day.

The king got out an old ratty deck of cards after breakfast, and him
and the duke played seven-up a while, five cents a game.  Then they got
tired of it, and allowed they would “lay out a campaign,” as they called
it. The duke went down into his carpet-bag, and fetched up a lot of
little printed bills and read them out loud.  One bill said, “The
celebrated Dr. Armand de Montalban, of Paris,” would “lecture on the
Science of Phrenology” at such and such a place, on the blank day of
blank, at ten cents admission, and “furnish charts of character at
twenty-five cents apiece.”  The duke said that was _him_.  In another
bill he was the “world-renowned Shakespearian tragedian, Garrick the
Younger, of Drury Lane, London.”  In other bills he had a lot of other
names and done other wonderful things, like finding water and gold with
a “divining-rod,” “dissipating witch spells,” and so on.  By and by he
says:

“But the histrionic muse is the darling.  Have you ever trod the boards,
Royalty?”

“No,” says the king.

“You shall, then, before you're three days older, Fallen Grandeur,” says
the duke.  “The first good town we come to we'll hire a hall and do the
sword fight in Richard III. and the balcony scene in Romeo and Juliet.
How does that strike you?”

“I'm in, up to the hub, for anything that will pay, Bilgewater; but, you
see, I don't know nothing about play-actin', and hain't ever seen much
of it.  I was too small when pap used to have 'em at the palace.  Do you
reckon you can learn me?”

“Easy!”

“All right.  I'm jist a-freezn' for something fresh, anyway.  Le's
commence right away.”

So the duke he told him all about who Romeo was and who Juliet was, and
said he was used to being Romeo, so the king could be Juliet.

“But if Juliet's such a young gal, duke, my peeled head and my white
whiskers is goin' to look oncommon odd on her, maybe.”

“No, don't you worry; these country jakes won't ever think of that.
Besides, you know, you'll be in costume, and that makes all the
difference in the world; Juliet's in a balcony, enjoying the moonlight
before she goes to bed, and she's got on her night-gown and her ruffled
nightcap.  Here are the costumes for the parts.”

He got out two or three curtain-calico suits, which he said was
meedyevil armor for Richard III. and t'other chap, and a long white
cotton nightshirt and a ruffled nightcap to match.  The king was
satisfied; so the duke got out his book and read the parts over in the
most splendid spread-eagle way, prancing around and acting at the same
time, to show how it had got to be done; then he give the book to the
king and told him to get his part by heart.

There was a little one-horse town about three mile down the bend, and
after dinner the duke said he had ciphered out his idea about how to run
in daylight without it being dangersome for Jim; so he allowed he would
go down to the town and fix that thing.  The king allowed he would go,
too, and see if he couldn't strike something.  We was out of coffee, so
Jim said I better go along with them in the canoe and get some.

When we got there there warn't nobody stirring; streets empty, and
perfectly dead and still, like Sunday.  We found a sick nigger sunning
himself in a back yard, and he said everybody that warn't too young or
too sick or too old was gone to camp-meeting, about two mile back in the
woods.  The king got the directions, and allowed he'd go and work that
camp-meeting for all it was worth, and I might go, too.

The duke said what he was after was a printing-office.  We found it;
a little bit of a concern, up over a carpenter shop--carpenters and
printers all gone to the meeting, and no doors locked.  It was a dirty,
littered-up place, and had ink marks, and handbills with pictures of
horses and runaway niggers on them, all over the walls.  The duke shed
his coat and said he was all right now.  So me and the king lit out for
the camp-meeting.

We got there in about a half an hour fairly dripping, for it was a most
awful hot day.  There was as much as a thousand people there from
twenty mile around.  The woods was full of teams and wagons, hitched
everywheres, feeding out of the wagon-troughs and stomping to keep
off the flies.  There was sheds made out of poles and roofed over with
branches, where they had lemonade and gingerbread to sell, and piles of
watermelons and green corn and such-like truck.

The preaching was going on under the same kinds of sheds, only they was
bigger and held crowds of people.  The benches was made out of outside
slabs of logs, with holes bored in the round side to drive sticks into
for legs. They didn't have no backs.  The preachers had high platforms
to stand on at one end of the sheds.  The women had on sun-bonnets;
and some had linsey-woolsey frocks, some gingham ones, and a few of the
young ones had on calico.  Some of the young men was barefooted, and
some of the children didn't have on any clothes but just a tow-linen
shirt.  Some of the old women was knitting, and some of the young folks
was courting on the sly.

The first shed we come to the preacher was lining out a hymn.  He lined
out two lines, everybody sung it, and it was kind of grand to hear it,
there was so many of them and they done it in such a rousing way; then
he lined out two more for them to sing--and so on.  The people woke up
more and more, and sung louder and louder; and towards the end some
begun to groan, and some begun to shout.  Then the preacher begun to
preach, and begun in earnest, too; and went weaving first to one side of
the platform and then the other, and then a-leaning down over the front
of it, with his arms and his body going all the time, and shouting his
words out with all his might; and every now and then he would hold up
his Bible and spread it open, and kind of pass it around this way and
that, shouting, “It's the brazen serpent in the wilderness!  Look upon
it and live!”  And people would shout out, “Glory!--A-a-_men_!”  And so
he went on, and the people groaning and crying and saying amen:

“Oh, come to the mourners' bench! come, black with sin! (_Amen_!) come,
sick and sore! (_Amen_!) come, lame and halt and blind! (_Amen_!) come,
pore and needy, sunk in shame! (_A-A-Men_!) come, all that's worn and
soiled and suffering!--come with a broken spirit! come with a contrite
heart! come in your rags and sin and dirt! the waters that cleanse
is free, the door of heaven stands open--oh, enter in and be at rest!”
 (_A-A-Men_!  _Glory, Glory Hallelujah!_)

And so on.  You couldn't make out what the preacher said any more, on
account of the shouting and crying.  Folks got up everywheres in the
crowd, and worked their way just by main strength to the mourners'
bench, with the tears running down their faces; and when all the
mourners had got up there to the front benches in a crowd, they sung and
shouted and flung themselves down on the straw, just crazy and wild.

Well, the first I knowed the king got a-going, and you could hear him
over everybody; and next he went a-charging up on to the platform, and
the preacher he begged him to speak to the people, and he done it.  He
told them he was a pirate--been a pirate for thirty years out in the
Indian Ocean--and his crew was thinned out considerable last spring in
a fight, and he was home now to take out some fresh men, and thanks to
goodness he'd been robbed last night and put ashore off of a steamboat
without a cent, and he was glad of it; it was the blessedest thing that
ever happened to him, because he was a changed man now, and happy for
the first time in his life; and, poor as he was, he was going to start
right off and work his way back to the Indian Ocean, and put in the rest
of his life trying to turn the pirates into the true path; for he could
do it better than anybody else, being acquainted with all pirate crews
in that ocean; and though it would take him a long time to get there
without money, he would get there anyway, and every time he convinced
a pirate he would say to him, “Don't you thank me, don't you give me no
credit; it all belongs to them dear people in Pokeville camp-meeting,
natural brothers and benefactors of the race, and that dear preacher
there, the truest friend a pirate ever had!”

And then he busted into tears, and so did everybody.  Then somebody
sings out, “Take up a collection for him, take up a collection!”  Well,
a half a dozen made a jump to do it, but somebody sings out, “Let _him_
pass the hat around!”  Then everybody said it, the preacher too.

So the king went all through the crowd with his hat swabbing his eyes,
and blessing the people and praising them and thanking them for being
so good to the poor pirates away off there; and every little while the
prettiest kind of girls, with the tears running down their cheeks, would
up and ask him would he let them kiss him for to remember him by; and he
always done it; and some of them he hugged and kissed as many as five or
six times--and he was invited to stay a week; and everybody wanted him to
live in their houses, and said they'd think it was an honor; but he said
as this was the last day of the camp-meeting he couldn't do no good, and
besides he was in a sweat to get to the Indian Ocean right off and go to
work on the pirates.

When we got back to the raft and he come to count up he found he had
collected eighty-seven dollars and seventy-five cents.  And then he had
fetched away a three-gallon jug of whisky, too, that he found under a
wagon when he was starting home through the woods.  The king said,
take it all around, it laid over any day he'd ever put in in the
missionarying line.  He said it warn't no use talking, heathens don't
amount to shucks alongside of pirates to work a camp-meeting with.

The duke was thinking _he'd_ been doing pretty well till the king come
to show up, but after that he didn't think so so much.  He had set
up and printed off two little jobs for farmers in that
printing-office--horse bills--and took the money, four dollars.  And he
had got in ten dollars' worth of advertisements for the paper, which he
said he would put in for four dollars if they would pay in advance--so
they done it. The price of the paper was two dollars a year, but he took
in three subscriptions for half a dollar apiece on condition of them
paying him in advance; they were going to pay in cordwood and onions as
usual, but he said he had just bought the concern and knocked down the
price as low as he could afford it, and was going to run it for cash.
 He set up a little piece of poetry, which he made, himself, out of
his own head--three verses--kind of sweet and saddish--the name of it was,
“Yes, crush, cold world, this breaking heart”--and he left that all set
up and ready to print in the paper, and didn't charge nothing for it.
 Well, he took in nine dollars and a half, and said he'd done a pretty
square day's work for it.

Then he showed us another little job he'd printed and hadn't charged
for, because it was for us.  It had a picture of a runaway nigger with
a bundle on a stick over his shoulder, and “$200 reward” under it.  The
reading was all about Jim, and just described him to a dot.  It said
he run away from St. Jacques' plantation, forty mile below New Orleans,
last winter, and likely went north, and whoever would catch him and send
him back he could have the reward and expenses.

“Now,” says the duke, “after to-night we can run in the daytime if we
want to.  Whenever we see anybody coming we can tie Jim hand and foot
with a rope, and lay him in the wigwam and show this handbill and say we
captured him up the river, and were too poor to travel on a steamboat,
so we got this little raft on credit from our friends and are going down
to get the reward.  Handcuffs and chains would look still better on Jim,
but it wouldn't go well with the story of us being so poor.  Too much
like jewelry.  Ropes are the correct thing--we must preserve the unities,
as we say on the boards.”

We all said the duke was pretty smart, and there couldn't be no trouble
about running daytimes.  We judged we could make miles enough that night
to get out of the reach of the powwow we reckoned the duke's work in
the printing office was going to make in that little town; then we could
boom right along if we wanted to.

We laid low and kept still, and never shoved out till nearly ten
o'clock; then we slid by, pretty wide away from the town, and didn't
hoist our lantern till we was clear out of sight of it.

When Jim called me to take the watch at four in the morning, he says:

“Huck, does you reck'n we gwyne to run acrost any mo' kings on dis
trip?”

“No,” I says, “I reckon not.”

“Well,” says he, “dat's all right, den.  I doan' mine one er two kings,
but dat's enough.  Dis one's powerful drunk, en de duke ain' much
better.”

I found Jim had been trying to get him to talk French, so he could hear
what it was like; but he said he had been in this country so long, and
had so much trouble, he'd forgot it.




CHAPTER XXI.

IT was after sun-up now, but we went right on and didn't tie up.  The
king and the duke turned out by and by looking pretty rusty; but after
they'd jumped overboard and took a swim it chippered them up a good
deal. After breakfast the king he took a seat on the corner of the raft,
and pulled off his boots and rolled up his britches, and let his legs
dangle in the water, so as to be comfortable, and lit his pipe, and went
to getting his Romeo and Juliet by heart.  When he had got it pretty
good him and the duke begun to practice it together.  The duke had to
learn him over and over again how to say every speech; and he made him
sigh, and put his hand on his heart, and after a while he said he done
it pretty well; “only,” he says, “you mustn't bellow out _Romeo_!
that way, like a bull--you must say it soft and sick and languishy,
so--R-o-o-meo! that is the idea; for Juliet's a dear sweet mere child of
a girl, you know, and she doesn't bray like a jackass.”

Well, next they got out a couple of long swords that the duke made out
of oak laths, and begun to practice the sword fight--the duke called
himself Richard III.; and the way they laid on and pranced around
the raft was grand to see.  But by and by the king tripped and fell
overboard, and after that they took a rest, and had a talk about all
kinds of adventures they'd had in other times along the river.

After dinner the duke says:

“Well, Capet, we'll want to make this a first-class show, you know, so
I guess we'll add a little more to it.  We want a little something to
answer encores with, anyway.”

“What's onkores, Bilgewater?”

The duke told him, and then says:

“I'll answer by doing the Highland fling or the sailor's hornpipe; and
you--well, let me see--oh, I've got it--you can do Hamlet's soliloquy.”

“Hamlet's which?”

“Hamlet's soliloquy, you know; the most celebrated thing in Shakespeare.
Ah, it's sublime, sublime!  Always fetches the house.  I haven't got
it in the book--I've only got one volume--but I reckon I can piece it out
from memory.  I'll just walk up and down a minute, and see if I can call
it back from recollection's vaults.”

So he went to marching up and down, thinking, and frowning horrible
every now and then; then he would hoist up his eyebrows; next he would
squeeze his hand on his forehead and stagger back and kind of moan; next
he would sigh, and next he'd let on to drop a tear.  It was beautiful
to see him. By and by he got it.  He told us to give attention.  Then
he strikes a most noble attitude, with one leg shoved forwards, and his
arms stretched away up, and his head tilted back, looking up at the sky;
and then he begins to rip and rave and grit his teeth; and after that,
all through his speech, he howled, and spread around, and swelled up his
chest, and just knocked the spots out of any acting ever I see before.
 This is the speech--I learned it, easy enough, while he was learning it
to the king:

To be, or not to be; that is the bare bodkin That makes calamity of
so long life; For who would fardels bear, till Birnam Wood do come
to Dunsinane, But that the fear of something after death Murders the
innocent sleep, Great nature's second course, And makes us rather sling
the arrows of outrageous fortune Than fly to others that we know not of.
There's the respect must give us pause: Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I
would thou couldst; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The
oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely, The law's delay, and the
quietus which his pangs might take. In the dead waste and middle of the
night, when churchyards yawn In customary suits of solemn black, But
that the undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveler returns,
Breathes forth contagion on the world, And thus the native hue of
resolution, like the poor cat i' the adage, Is sicklied o'er with care.
And all the clouds that lowered o'er our housetops, With this
regard their currents turn awry, And lose the name of action. 'Tis a
consummation devoutly to be wished. But soft you, the fair Ophelia: Ope
not thy ponderous and marble jaws. But get thee to a nunnery&mdash;go!

Well, the old man he liked that speech, and he mighty soon got it so he
could do it first rate. It seemed like he was just born for it; and when
he had his hand in and was excited, it was perfectly lovely the way he
would rip and tear and rair up behind when he was getting it off.

The first chance we got, the duke he had some show bills printed; and
after that, for two or three days as we floated along, the raft was a
most uncommon lively place, for there warn't nothing but sword-fighting
and rehearsing--as the duke called it--going on all the time. One morning,
when we was pretty well down the State of Arkansaw, we come in sight
of a little one-horse town in a big bend; so we tied up about
three-quarters of a mile above it, in the mouth of a crick which was
shut in like a tunnel by the cypress trees, and all of us but Jim took
the canoe and went down there to see if there was any chance in that
place for our show.

We struck it mighty lucky; there was going to be a circus there that
afternoon, and the country people was already beginning to come in, in
all kinds of old shackly wagons, and on horses. The circus would leave
before night, so our show would have a pretty good chance. The duke he
hired the court house, and we went around and stuck up our bills. They
read like this:

Shaksperean Revival!!!

Wonderful Attraction!

For One Night Only! The world renowned tragedians,

David Garrick the younger, of Drury Lane Theatre, London,

and

Edmund Kean the elder, of the Royal Haymarket Theatre, Whitechapel,
Pudding Lane, Piccadilly, London, and the Royal Continental Theatres, in
their sublime Shaksperean Spectacle entitled The Balcony Scene in

Romeo and Juliet!!!

Romeo...................................... Mr. Garrick.

Juliet..................................... Mr. Kean.

Assisted by the whole strength of the company!

New costumes, new scenery, new appointments!

Also:

The thrilling, masterly, and blood-curdling Broad-sword conflict In
Richard III.!!!

Richard III................................ Mr. Garrick.

Richmond................................... Mr. Kean.

also:

(by special request,)

Hamlet's Immortal Soliloquy!!

By the Illustrious Kean!

Done by him 300 consecutive nights in Paris!

For One Night Only,

On account of imperative European engagements!

Admission 25 cents; children and servants, 10 cents.

Then we went loafing around the town. The stores and houses was most all
old shackly dried-up frame concerns that hadn't ever been painted; they
was set up three or four foot above ground on stilts, so as to be out of
reach of the water when the river was overflowed. The houses had little
gardens around them, but they didn't seem to raise hardly anything in
them but jimpson weeds, and sunflowers, and ash-piles, and old curled-up
boots and shoes, and pieces of bottles, and rags, and played-out
tin-ware. The fences was made of different kinds of boards, nailed on
at different times; and they leaned every which-way, and had gates that
didn't generly have but one hinge--a leather one. Some of the fences
had been whitewashed, some time or another, but the duke said it was in
Clumbus's time, like enough. There was generly hogs in the garden, and
people driving them out.

All the stores was along one street.  They had white domestic awnings in
front, and the country people hitched their horses to the awning-posts.
There was empty drygoods boxes under the awnings, and loafers roosting
on them all day long, whittling them with their Barlow knives; and
chawing tobacco, and gaping and yawning and stretching--a mighty ornery
lot. They generly had on yellow straw hats most as wide as an umbrella,
but didn't wear no coats nor waistcoats, they called one another Bill,
and Buck, and Hank, and Joe, and Andy, and talked lazy and drawly, and
used considerable many cuss words.  There was as many as one loafer
leaning up against every awning-post, and he most always had his hands
in his britches-pockets, except when he fetched them out to lend a chaw
of tobacco or scratch.  What a body was hearing amongst them all the
time was:

“Gimme a chaw 'v tobacker, Hank.”

“Cain't; I hain't got but one chaw left.  Ask Bill.”

Maybe Bill he gives him a chaw; maybe he lies and says he ain't got
none. Some of them kinds of loafers never has a cent in the world, nor a
chaw of tobacco of their own.  They get all their chawing by borrowing;
they say to a fellow, “I wisht you'd len' me a chaw, Jack, I jist this
minute give Ben Thompson the last chaw I had”--which is a lie pretty
much everytime; it don't fool nobody but a stranger; but Jack ain't no
stranger, so he says:

“_You_ give him a chaw, did you?  So did your sister's cat's
grandmother. You pay me back the chaws you've awready borry'd off'n me,
Lafe Buckner, then I'll loan you one or two ton of it, and won't charge
you no back intrust, nuther.”

“Well, I _did_ pay you back some of it wunst.”

“Yes, you did--'bout six chaws.  You borry'd store tobacker and paid back
nigger-head.”

Store tobacco is flat black plug, but these fellows mostly chaws the
natural leaf twisted.  When they borrow a chaw they don't generly cut it
off with a knife, but set the plug in between their teeth, and gnaw with
their teeth and tug at the plug with their hands till they get it in
two; then sometimes the one that owns the tobacco looks mournful at it
when it's handed back, and says, sarcastic:

“Here, gimme the _chaw_, and you take the _plug_.”

All the streets and lanes was just mud; they warn't nothing else _but_
mud--mud as black as tar and nigh about a foot deep in some places,
and two or three inches deep in _all_ the places.  The hogs loafed and
grunted around everywheres.  You'd see a muddy sow and a litter of pigs
come lazying along the street and whollop herself right down in the way,
where folks had to walk around her, and she'd stretch out and shut her
eyes and wave her ears whilst the pigs was milking her, and look as
happy as if she was on salary. And pretty soon you'd hear a loafer
sing out, “Hi!  _so_ boy! sick him, Tige!” and away the sow would go,
squealing most horrible, with a dog or two swinging to each ear, and
three or four dozen more a-coming; and then you would see all the
loafers get up and watch the thing out of sight, and laugh at the fun
and look grateful for the noise.  Then they'd settle back again till
there was a dog fight.  There couldn't anything wake them up all over,
and make them happy all over, like a dog fight--unless it might be
putting turpentine on a stray dog and setting fire to him, or tying a
tin pan to his tail and see him run himself to death.

On the river front some of the houses was sticking out over the bank,
and they was bowed and bent, and about ready to tumble in. The people
had moved out of them.  The bank was caved away under one corner of some
others, and that corner was hanging over.  People lived in them yet, but
it was dangersome, because sometimes a strip of land as wide as a house
caves in at a time.  Sometimes a belt of land a quarter of a mile deep
will start in and cave along and cave along till it all caves into the
river in one summer. Such a town as that has to be always moving back,
and back, and back, because the river's always gnawing at it.

The nearer it got to noon that day the thicker and thicker was the
wagons and horses in the streets, and more coming all the time.
 Families fetched their dinners with them from the country, and eat them
in the wagons.  There was considerable whisky drinking going on, and I
seen three fights.  By and by somebody sings out:

“Here comes old Boggs!--in from the country for his little old monthly
drunk; here he comes, boys!”

All the loafers looked glad; I reckoned they was used to having fun out
of Boggs.  One of them says:

“Wonder who he's a-gwyne to chaw up this time.  If he'd a-chawed up all
the men he's ben a-gwyne to chaw up in the last twenty year he'd have
considerable ruputation now.”

Another one says, “I wisht old Boggs 'd threaten me, 'cuz then I'd know
I warn't gwyne to die for a thousan' year.”

Boggs comes a-tearing along on his horse, whooping and yelling like an
Injun, and singing out:

“Cler the track, thar.  I'm on the waw-path, and the price uv coffins is
a-gwyne to raise.”

He was drunk, and weaving about in his saddle; he was over fifty year
old, and had a very red face.  Everybody yelled at him and laughed at
him and sassed him, and he sassed back, and said he'd attend to them and
lay them out in their regular turns, but he couldn't wait now because
he'd come to town to kill old Colonel Sherburn, and his motto was, “Meat
first, and spoon vittles to top off on.”

He see me, and rode up and says:

“Whar'd you come f'm, boy?  You prepared to die?”

Then he rode on.  I was scared, but a man says:

“He don't mean nothing; he's always a-carryin' on like that when he's
drunk.  He's the best naturedest old fool in Arkansaw--never hurt nobody,
drunk nor sober.”

Boggs rode up before the biggest store in town, and bent his head down
so he could see under the curtain of the awning and yells:

“Come out here, Sherburn! Come out and meet the man you've swindled.
You're the houn' I'm after, and I'm a-gwyne to have you, too!”

And so he went on, calling Sherburn everything he could lay his tongue
to, and the whole street packed with people listening and laughing and
going on.  By and by a proud-looking man about fifty-five--and he was a
heap the best dressed man in that town, too--steps out of the store, and
the crowd drops back on each side to let him come.  He says to Boggs,
mighty ca'm and slow--he says:

“I'm tired of this, but I'll endure it till one o'clock.  Till one
o'clock, mind--no longer.  If you open your mouth against me only once
after that time you can't travel so far but I will find you.”

Then he turns and goes in.  The crowd looked mighty sober; nobody
stirred, and there warn't no more laughing.  Boggs rode off
blackguarding Sherburn as loud as he could yell, all down the street;
and pretty soon back he comes and stops before the store, still keeping
it up.  Some men crowded around him and tried to get him to shut up,
but he wouldn't; they told him it would be one o'clock in about fifteen
minutes, and so he _must_ go home--he must go right away.  But it didn't
do no good.  He cussed away with all his might, and throwed his hat down
in the mud and rode over it, and pretty soon away he went a-raging down
the street again, with his gray hair a-flying. Everybody that could get
a chance at him tried their best to coax him off of his horse so they
could lock him up and get him sober; but it warn't no use--up the street
he would tear again, and give Sherburn another cussing.  By and by
somebody says:

“Go for his daughter!--quick, go for his daughter; sometimes he'll listen
to her.  If anybody can persuade him, she can.”

So somebody started on a run.  I walked down street a ways and stopped.
In about five or ten minutes here comes Boggs again, but not on his
horse.  He was a-reeling across the street towards me, bare-headed, with
a friend on both sides of him a-holt of his arms and hurrying him along.
He was quiet, and looked uneasy; and he warn't hanging back any, but was
doing some of the hurrying himself.  Somebody sings out:

“Boggs!”

I looked over there to see who said it, and it was that Colonel
Sherburn. He was standing perfectly still in the street, and had a
pistol raised in his right hand--not aiming it, but holding it out with
the barrel tilted up towards the sky.  The same second I see a young
girl coming on the run, and two men with her.  Boggs and the men turned
round to see who called him, and when they see the pistol the men
jumped to one side, and the pistol-barrel come down slow and steady to
a level--both barrels cocked. Boggs throws up both of his hands and says,
“O Lord, don't shoot!”  Bang! goes the first shot, and he staggers back,
clawing at the air--bang! goes the second one, and he tumbles backwards
on to the ground, heavy and solid, with his arms spread out.  That young
girl screamed out and comes rushing, and down she throws herself on her
father, crying, and saying, “Oh, he's killed him, he's killed him!”  The
crowd closed up around them, and shouldered and jammed one another, with
their necks stretched, trying to see, and people on the inside trying to
shove them back and shouting, “Back, back! give him air, give him air!”

Colonel Sherburn he tossed his pistol on to the ground, and turned
around on his heels and walked off.

They took Boggs to a little drug store, the crowd pressing around just
the same, and the whole town following, and I rushed and got a good
place at the window, where I was close to him and could see in.  They
laid him on the floor and put one large Bible under his head, and opened
another one and spread it on his breast; but they tore open his shirt
first, and I seen where one of the bullets went in.  He made about a
dozen long gasps, his breast lifting the Bible up when he drawed in his
breath, and letting it down again when he breathed it out--and after that
he laid still; he was dead.  Then they pulled his daughter away from
him, screaming and crying, and took her off.  She was about sixteen, and
very sweet and gentle looking, but awful pale and scared.

Well, pretty soon the whole town was there, squirming and scrouging and
pushing and shoving to get at the window and have a look, but people
that had the places wouldn't give them up, and folks behind them was
saying all the time, “Say, now, you've looked enough, you fellows;
'tain't right and 'tain't fair for you to stay thar all the time, and
never give nobody a chance; other folks has their rights as well as
you.”

There was considerable jawing back, so I slid out, thinking maybe
there was going to be trouble.  The streets was full, and everybody was
excited. Everybody that seen the shooting was telling how it happened,
and there was a big crowd packed around each one of these fellows,
stretching their necks and listening.  One long, lanky man, with long
hair and a big white fur stovepipe hat on the back of his head, and a
crooked-handled cane, marked out the places on the ground where Boggs
stood and where Sherburn stood, and the people following him around from
one place to t'other and watching everything he done, and bobbing their
heads to show they understood, and stooping a little and resting their
hands on their thighs to watch him mark the places on the ground with
his cane; and then he stood up straight and stiff where Sherburn had
stood, frowning and having his hat-brim down over his eyes, and sung
out, “Boggs!” and then fetched his cane down slow to a level, and says
“Bang!” staggered backwards, says “Bang!” again, and fell down flat on
his back. The people that had seen the thing said he done it perfect;
said it was just exactly the way it all happened.  Then as much as a
dozen people got out their bottles and treated him.

Well, by and by somebody said Sherburn ought to be lynched.  In about a
minute everybody was saying it; so away they went, mad and yelling, and
snatching down every clothes-line they come to to do the hanging with.




CHAPTER XXII.

THEY swarmed up towards Sherburn's house, a-whooping and raging like
Injuns, and everything had to clear the way or get run over and tromped
to mush, and it was awful to see.  Children was heeling it ahead of the
mob, screaming and trying to get out of the way; and every window along
the road was full of women's heads, and there was nigger boys in every
tree, and bucks and wenches looking over every fence; and as soon as the
mob would get nearly to them they would break and skaddle back out of
reach.  Lots of the women and girls was crying and taking on, scared
most to death.

They swarmed up in front of Sherburn's palings as thick as they could
jam together, and you couldn't hear yourself think for the noise.  It
was a little twenty-foot yard.  Some sung out “Tear down the fence! tear
down the fence!”  Then there was a racket of ripping and tearing and
smashing, and down she goes, and the front wall of the crowd begins to
roll in like a wave.

Just then Sherburn steps out on to the roof of his little front porch,
with a double-barrel gun in his hand, and takes his stand, perfectly
ca'm and deliberate, not saying a word.  The racket stopped, and the
wave sucked back.

Sherburn never said a word--just stood there, looking down.  The
stillness was awful creepy and uncomfortable.  Sherburn run his eye slow
along the crowd; and wherever it struck the people tried a little to
out-gaze him, but they couldn't; they dropped their eyes and looked
sneaky. Then pretty soon Sherburn sort of laughed; not the pleasant
kind, but the kind that makes you feel like when you are eating bread
that's got sand in it.

Then he says, slow and scornful:

“The idea of _you_ lynching anybody!  It's amusing.  The idea of you
thinking you had pluck enough to lynch a _man_!  Because you're brave
enough to tar and feather poor friendless cast-out women that come along
here, did that make you think you had grit enough to lay your hands on a
_man_?  Why, a _man's_ safe in the hands of ten thousand of your kind--as
long as it's daytime and you're not behind him.

“Do I know you?  I know you clear through. I was born and raised in the
South, and I've lived in the North; so I know the average all around.
The average man's a coward.  In the North he lets anybody walk over him
that wants to, and goes home and prays for a humble spirit to bear it.
In the South one man all by himself, has stopped a stage full of men
in the daytime, and robbed the lot.  Your newspapers call you a
brave people so much that you think you are braver than any other
people--whereas you're just _as_ brave, and no braver.  Why don't your
juries hang murderers?  Because they're afraid the man's friends will
shoot them in the back, in the dark--and it's just what they _would_ do.

“So they always acquit; and then a _man_ goes in the night, with a
hundred masked cowards at his back and lynches the rascal.  Your mistake
is, that you didn't bring a man with you; that's one mistake, and the
other is that you didn't come in the dark and fetch your masks.  You
brought _part_ of a man--Buck Harkness, there--and if you hadn't had him
to start you, you'd a taken it out in blowing.

“You didn't want to come.  The average man don't like trouble and
danger. _You_ don't like trouble and danger.  But if only _half_ a
man--like Buck Harkness, there--shouts 'Lynch him! lynch him!' you're
afraid to back down--afraid you'll be found out to be what you
are--_cowards_--and so you raise a yell, and hang yourselves on to that
half-a-man's coat-tail, and come raging up here, swearing what big
things you're going to do. The pitifulest thing out is a mob; that's
what an army is--a mob; they don't fight with courage that's born in
them, but with courage that's borrowed from their mass, and from their
officers.  But a mob without any _man_ at the head of it is _beneath_
pitifulness.  Now the thing for _you_ to do is to droop your tails and
go home and crawl in a hole.  If any real lynching's going to be done it
will be done in the dark, Southern fashion; and when they come they'll
bring their masks, and fetch a _man_ along.  Now _leave_--and take your
half-a-man with you”--tossing his gun up across his left arm and cocking
it when he says this.

The crowd washed back sudden, and then broke all apart, and went tearing
off every which way, and Buck Harkness he heeled it after them, looking
tolerable cheap.  I could a stayed if I wanted to, but I didn't want to.

I went to the circus and loafed around the back side till the watchman
went by, and then dived in under the tent.  I had my twenty-dollar gold
piece and some other money, but I reckoned I better save it, because
there ain't no telling how soon you are going to need it, away from
home and amongst strangers that way.  You can't be too careful.  I ain't
opposed to spending money on circuses when there ain't no other way, but
there ain't no use in _wasting_ it on them.

It was a real bully circus.  It was the splendidest sight that ever was
when they all come riding in, two and two, a gentleman and lady, side
by side, the men just in their drawers and undershirts, and no shoes
nor stirrups, and resting their hands on their thighs easy and
comfortable--there must a been twenty of them--and every lady with a
lovely complexion, and perfectly beautiful, and looking just like a gang
of real sure-enough queens, and dressed in clothes that cost millions of
dollars, and just littered with diamonds.  It was a powerful fine sight;
I never see anything so lovely.  And then one by one they got up
and stood, and went a-weaving around the ring so gentle and wavy and
graceful, the men looking ever so tall and airy and straight, with their
heads bobbing and skimming along, away up there under the tent-roof, and
every lady's rose-leafy dress flapping soft and silky around her hips,
and she looking like the most loveliest parasol.

And then faster and faster they went, all of them dancing, first one
foot out in the air and then the other, the horses leaning more and
more, and the ringmaster going round and round the center-pole, cracking
his whip and shouting “Hi!--hi!” and the clown cracking jokes behind
him; and by and by all hands dropped the reins, and every lady put her
knuckles on her hips and every gentleman folded his arms, and then how
the horses did lean over and hump themselves!  And so one after the
other they all skipped off into the ring, and made the sweetest bow I
ever see, and then scampered out, and everybody clapped their hands and
went just about wild.

Well, all through the circus they done the most astonishing things; and
all the time that clown carried on so it most killed the people.  The
ringmaster couldn't ever say a word to him but he was back at him quick
as a wink with the funniest things a body ever said; and how he ever
_could_ think of so many of them, and so sudden and so pat, was what I
couldn't noway understand. Why, I couldn't a thought of them in a year.
And by and by a drunk man tried to get into the ring--said he wanted to
ride; said he could ride as well as anybody that ever was.  They argued
and tried to keep him out, but he wouldn't listen, and the whole show
come to a standstill.  Then the people begun to holler at him and make
fun of him, and that made him mad, and he begun to rip and tear; so that
stirred up the people, and a lot of men begun to pile down off of the
benches and swarm towards the ring, saying, “Knock him down! throw him
out!” and one or two women begun to scream.  So, then, the ringmaster
he made a little speech, and said he hoped there wouldn't be no
disturbance, and if the man would promise he wouldn't make no more
trouble he would let him ride if he thought he could stay on the horse.
 So everybody laughed and said all right, and the man got on. The minute
he was on, the horse begun to rip and tear and jump and cavort around,
with two circus men hanging on to his bridle trying to hold him, and the
drunk man hanging on to his neck, and his heels flying in the air every
jump, and the whole crowd of people standing up shouting and laughing
till tears rolled down.  And at last, sure enough, all the circus men
could do, the horse broke loose, and away he went like the very nation,
round and round the ring, with that sot laying down on him and hanging
to his neck, with first one leg hanging most to the ground on one side,
and then t'other one on t'other side, and the people just crazy.  It
warn't funny to me, though; I was all of a tremble to see his danger.
 But pretty soon he struggled up astraddle and grabbed the bridle,
a-reeling this way and that; and the next minute he sprung up and
dropped the bridle and stood! and the horse a-going like a house afire
too.  He just stood up there, a-sailing around as easy and comfortable
as if he warn't ever drunk in his life--and then he begun to pull off his
clothes and sling them.  He shed them so thick they kind of clogged up
the air, and altogether he shed seventeen suits. And, then, there he
was, slim and handsome, and dressed the gaudiest and prettiest you
ever saw, and he lit into that horse with his whip and made him fairly
hum--and finally skipped off, and made his bow and danced off to
the dressing-room, and everybody just a-howling with pleasure and
astonishment.

Then the ringmaster he see how he had been fooled, and he _was_ the
sickest ringmaster you ever see, I reckon.  Why, it was one of his own
men!  He had got up that joke all out of his own head, and never let on
to nobody. Well, I felt sheepish enough to be took in so, but I wouldn't
a been in that ringmaster's place, not for a thousand dollars.  I don't
know; there may be bullier circuses than what that one was, but I
never struck them yet. Anyways, it was plenty good enough for _me_; and
wherever I run across it, it can have all of _my_ custom every time.

Well, that night we had _our_ show; but there warn't only about twelve
people there--just enough to pay expenses.  And they laughed all the
time, and that made the duke mad; and everybody left, anyway, before
the show was over, but one boy which was asleep.  So the duke said these
Arkansaw lunkheads couldn't come up to Shakespeare; what they wanted
was low comedy--and maybe something ruther worse than low comedy, he
reckoned.  He said he could size their style.  So next morning he got
some big sheets of wrapping paper and some black paint, and drawed off
some handbills, and stuck them up all over the village.  The bills said:




CHAPTER XXIII.

WELL, all day him and the king was hard at it, rigging up a stage and
a curtain and a row of candles for footlights; and that night the house
was jam full of men in no time.  When the place couldn't hold no more,
the duke he quit tending door and went around the back way and come on
to the stage and stood up before the curtain and made a little speech,
and praised up this tragedy, and said it was the most thrillingest one
that ever was; and so he went on a-bragging about the tragedy, and about
Edmund Kean the Elder, which was to play the main principal part in it;
and at last when he'd got everybody's expectations up high enough, he
rolled up the curtain, and the next minute the king come a-prancing
out on all fours, naked; and he was painted all over,
ring-streaked-and-striped, all sorts of colors, as splendid as a
rainbow.  And--but never mind the rest of his outfit; it was just wild,
but it was awful funny. The people most killed themselves laughing; and
when the king got done capering and capered off behind the scenes, they
roared and clapped and stormed and haw-hawed till he come back and done
it over again, and after that they made him do it another time. Well, it
would make a cow laugh to see the shines that old idiot cut.

Then the duke he lets the curtain down, and bows to the people, and says
the great tragedy will be performed only two nights more, on accounts of
pressing London engagements, where the seats is all sold already for it
in Drury Lane; and then he makes them another bow, and says if he has
succeeded in pleasing them and instructing them, he will be deeply
obleeged if they will mention it to their friends and get them to come
and see it.

Twenty people sings out:

“What, is it over?  Is that _all_?”

The duke says yes.  Then there was a fine time.  Everybody sings
out, “Sold!” and rose up mad, and was a-going for that stage and them
tragedians.  But a big, fine looking man jumps up on a bench and shouts:

“Hold on!  Just a word, gentlemen.”  They stopped to listen.  “We are
sold--mighty badly sold.  But we don't want to be the laughing stock of
this whole town, I reckon, and never hear the last of this thing as long
as we live.  _No_.  What we want is to go out of here quiet, and talk
this show up, and sell the _rest_ of the town!  Then we'll all be in the
same boat.  Ain't that sensible?” (“You bet it is!--the jedge is right!”
 everybody sings out.) “All right, then--not a word about any sell.  Go
along home, and advise everybody to come and see the tragedy.”

Next day you couldn't hear nothing around that town but how splendid
that show was.  House was jammed again that night, and we sold this
crowd the same way.  When me and the king and the duke got home to the
raft we all had a supper; and by and by, about midnight, they made Jim
and me back her out and float her down the middle of the river, and
fetch her in and hide her about two mile below town.

The third night the house was crammed again--and they warn't new-comers
this time, but people that was at the show the other two nights.  I
stood by the duke at the door, and I see that every man that went in had
his pockets bulging, or something muffled up under his coat--and I see it
warn't no perfumery, neither, not by a long sight.  I smelt sickly eggs
by the barrel, and rotten cabbages, and such things; and if I know the
signs of a dead cat being around, and I bet I do, there was sixty-four
of them went in.  I shoved in there for a minute, but it was too various
for me; I couldn't stand it.  Well, when the place couldn't hold no more
people the duke he give a fellow a quarter and told him to tend door
for him a minute, and then he started around for the stage door, I after
him; but the minute we turned the corner and was in the dark he says:

“Walk fast now till you get away from the houses, and then shin for the
raft like the dickens was after you!”

I done it, and he done the same.  We struck the raft at the same time,
and in less than two seconds we was gliding down stream, all dark and
still, and edging towards the middle of the river, nobody saying a
word. I reckoned the poor king was in for a gaudy time of it with the
audience, but nothing of the sort; pretty soon he crawls out from under
the wigwam, and says:

“Well, how'd the old thing pan out this time, duke?”  He hadn't been
up-town at all.

We never showed a light till we was about ten mile below the village.
Then we lit up and had a supper, and the king and the duke fairly
laughed their bones loose over the way they'd served them people.  The
duke says:

“Greenhorns, flatheads!  I knew the first house would keep mum and let
the rest of the town get roped in; and I knew they'd lay for us the
third night, and consider it was _their_ turn now.  Well, it _is_ their
turn, and I'd give something to know how much they'd take for it.  I
_would_ just like to know how they're putting in their opportunity.
 They can turn it into a picnic if they want to--they brought plenty
provisions.”

Them rapscallions took in four hundred and sixty-five dollars in that
three nights.  I never see money hauled in by the wagon-load like that
before.  By and by, when they was asleep and snoring, Jim says:

“Don't it s'prise you de way dem kings carries on, Huck?”

“No,” I says, “it don't.”

“Why don't it, Huck?”

“Well, it don't, because it's in the breed.  I reckon they're all
alike.”

“But, Huck, dese kings o' ourn is reglar rapscallions; dat's jist what
dey is; dey's reglar rapscallions.”

“Well, that's what I'm a-saying; all kings is mostly rapscallions, as
fur as I can make out.”

“Is dat so?”

“You read about them once--you'll see.  Look at Henry the Eight; this 'n
's a Sunday-school Superintendent to _him_.  And look at Charles Second,
and Louis Fourteen, and Louis Fifteen, and James Second, and Edward
Second, and Richard Third, and forty more; besides all them Saxon
heptarchies that used to rip around so in old times and raise Cain.  My,
you ought to seen old Henry the Eight when he was in bloom.  He _was_ a
blossom.  He used to marry a new wife every day, and chop off her head
next morning.  And he would do it just as indifferent as if he was
ordering up eggs.  'Fetch up Nell Gwynn,' he says.  They fetch her up.
Next morning, 'Chop off her head!'  And they chop it off.  'Fetch up
Jane Shore,' he says; and up she comes, Next morning, 'Chop off her
head'--and they chop it off.  'Ring up Fair Rosamun.'  Fair Rosamun
answers the bell.  Next morning, 'Chop off her head.'  And he made every
one of them tell him a tale every night; and he kept that up till he had
hogged a thousand and one tales that way, and then he put them all in a
book, and called it Domesday Book--which was a good name and stated the
case.  You don't know kings, Jim, but I know them; and this old rip
of ourn is one of the cleanest I've struck in history.  Well, Henry he
takes a notion he wants to get up some trouble with this country. How
does he go at it--give notice?--give the country a show?  No.  All of a
sudden he heaves all the tea in Boston Harbor overboard, and whacks
out a declaration of independence, and dares them to come on.  That was
_his_ style--he never give anybody a chance.  He had suspicions of his
father, the Duke of Wellington.  Well, what did he do?  Ask him to show
up?  No--drownded him in a butt of mamsey, like a cat.  S'pose people
left money laying around where he was--what did he do?  He collared it.
 S'pose he contracted to do a thing, and you paid him, and didn't set
down there and see that he done it--what did he do?  He always done the
other thing. S'pose he opened his mouth--what then?  If he didn't shut it
up powerful quick he'd lose a lie every time.  That's the kind of a bug
Henry was; and if we'd a had him along 'stead of our kings he'd a fooled
that town a heap worse than ourn done.  I don't say that ourn is lambs,
because they ain't, when you come right down to the cold facts; but they
ain't nothing to _that_ old ram, anyway.  All I say is, kings is kings,
and you got to make allowances.  Take them all around, they're a mighty
ornery lot. It's the way they're raised.”

“But dis one do _smell_ so like de nation, Huck.”

“Well, they all do, Jim.  We can't help the way a king smells; history
don't tell no way.”

“Now de duke, he's a tolerble likely man in some ways.”

“Yes, a duke's different.  But not very different.  This one's
a middling hard lot for a duke.  When he's drunk there ain't no
near-sighted man could tell him from a king.”

“Well, anyways, I doan' hanker for no mo' un um, Huck.  Dese is all I
kin stan'.”

“It's the way I feel, too, Jim.  But we've got them on our hands, and we
got to remember what they are, and make allowances.  Sometimes I wish we
could hear of a country that's out of kings.”

What was the use to tell Jim these warn't real kings and dukes?  It
wouldn't a done no good; and, besides, it was just as I said:  you
couldn't tell them from the real kind.

I went to sleep, and Jim didn't call me when it was my turn.  He often
done that.  When I waked up just at daybreak he was sitting there with
his head down betwixt his knees, moaning and mourning to himself.  I
didn't take notice nor let on.  I knowed what it was about.  He was
thinking about his wife and his children, away up yonder, and he was low
and homesick; because he hadn't ever been away from home before in his
life; and I do believe he cared just as much for his people as white
folks does for their'n.  It don't seem natural, but I reckon it's so.
 He was often moaning and mourning that way nights, when he judged I
was asleep, and saying, “Po' little 'Lizabeth! po' little Johnny! it's
mighty hard; I spec' I ain't ever gwyne to see you no mo', no mo'!”  He
was a mighty good nigger, Jim was.

But this time I somehow got to talking to him about his wife and young
ones; and by and by he says:

“What makes me feel so bad dis time 'uz bekase I hear sumpn over yonder
on de bank like a whack, er a slam, while ago, en it mine me er de time
I treat my little 'Lizabeth so ornery.  She warn't on'y 'bout fo' year
ole, en she tuck de sk'yarlet fever, en had a powful rough spell; but
she got well, en one day she was a-stannin' aroun', en I says to her, I
says:

“'Shet de do'.'

“She never done it; jis' stood dah, kiner smilin' up at me.  It make me
mad; en I says agin, mighty loud, I says:

“'Doan' you hear me?  Shet de do'!'

“She jis stood de same way, kiner smilin' up.  I was a-bilin'!  I says:

“'I lay I _make_ you mine!'

“En wid dat I fetch' her a slap side de head dat sont her a-sprawlin'.
Den I went into de yuther room, en 'uz gone 'bout ten minutes; en when
I come back dah was dat do' a-stannin' open _yit_, en dat chile stannin'
mos' right in it, a-lookin' down and mournin', en de tears runnin' down.
 My, but I _wuz_ mad!  I was a-gwyne for de chile, but jis' den--it was a
do' dat open innerds--jis' den, 'long come de wind en slam it to, behine
de chile, ker-BLAM!--en my lan', de chile never move'!  My breff mos'
hop outer me; en I feel so--so--I doan' know HOW I feel.  I crope out,
all a-tremblin', en crope aroun' en open de do' easy en slow, en poke my
head in behine de chile, sof' en still, en all uv a sudden I says POW!
jis' as loud as I could yell.  _She never budge!_  Oh, Huck, I bust out
a-cryin' en grab her up in my arms, en say, 'Oh, de po' little thing!
 De Lord God Amighty fogive po' ole Jim, kaze he never gwyne to fogive
hisself as long's he live!'  Oh, she was plumb deef en dumb, Huck, plumb
deef en dumb--en I'd ben a-treat'n her so!”




CHAPTER XXIV.

NEXT day, towards night, we laid up under a little willow towhead out in
the middle, where there was a village on each side of the river, and the
duke and the king begun to lay out a plan for working them towns.  Jim
he spoke to the duke, and said he hoped it wouldn't take but a few
hours, because it got mighty heavy and tiresome to him when he had to
lay all day in the wigwam tied with the rope.  You see, when we left him
all alone we had to tie him, because if anybody happened on to him all
by himself and not tied it wouldn't look much like he was a runaway
nigger, you know. So the duke said it _was_ kind of hard to have to lay
roped all day, and he'd cipher out some way to get around it.

He was uncommon bright, the duke was, and he soon struck it.  He dressed
Jim up in King Lear's outfit--it was a long curtain-calico gown, and a
white horse-hair wig and whiskers; and then he took his theater paint
and painted Jim's face and hands and ears and neck all over a dead,
dull, solid blue, like a man that's been drownded nine days.  Blamed if
he warn't the horriblest looking outrage I ever see.  Then the duke took
and wrote out a sign on a shingle so:

Sick Arab--but harmless when not out of his head.

And he nailed that shingle to a lath, and stood the lath up four or five
foot in front of the wigwam.  Jim was satisfied.  He said it was a sight
better than lying tied a couple of years every day, and trembling all
over every time there was a sound.  The duke told him to make himself
free and easy, and if anybody ever come meddling around, he must hop
out of the wigwam, and carry on a little, and fetch a howl or two like
a wild beast, and he reckoned they would light out and leave him alone.
 Which was sound enough judgment; but you take the average man, and he
wouldn't wait for him to howl.  Why, he didn't only look like he was
dead, he looked considerable more than that.

These rapscallions wanted to try the Nonesuch again, because there was
so much money in it, but they judged it wouldn't be safe, because maybe
the news might a worked along down by this time.  They couldn't hit no
project that suited exactly; so at last the duke said he reckoned he'd
lay off and work his brains an hour or two and see if he couldn't put up
something on the Arkansaw village; and the king he allowed he would drop
over to t'other village without any plan, but just trust in Providence
to lead him the profitable way--meaning the devil, I reckon.  We had all
bought store clothes where we stopped last; and now the king put his'n
on, and he told me to put mine on.  I done it, of course.  The king's
duds was all black, and he did look real swell and starchy.  I never
knowed how clothes could change a body before.  Why, before, he looked
like the orneriest old rip that ever was; but now, when he'd take off
his new white beaver and make a bow and do a smile, he looked that grand
and good and pious that you'd say he had walked right out of the ark,
and maybe was old Leviticus himself.  Jim cleaned up the canoe, and I
got my paddle ready.  There was a big steamboat laying at the shore away
up under the point, about three mile above the town--been there a couple
of hours, taking on freight.  Says the king:

“Seein' how I'm dressed, I reckon maybe I better arrive down from St.
Louis or Cincinnati, or some other big place.  Go for the steamboat,
Huckleberry; we'll come down to the village on her.”

I didn't have to be ordered twice to go and take a steamboat ride.
 I fetched the shore a half a mile above the village, and then went
scooting along the bluff bank in the easy water.  Pretty soon we come to
a nice innocent-looking young country jake setting on a log swabbing the
sweat off of his face, for it was powerful warm weather; and he had a
couple of big carpet-bags by him.

“Run her nose in shore,” says the king.  I done it.  “Wher' you bound
for, young man?”

“For the steamboat; going to Orleans.”

“Git aboard,” says the king.  “Hold on a minute, my servant 'll he'p you
with them bags.  Jump out and he'p the gentleman, Adolphus”--meaning me,
I see.

I done so, and then we all three started on again.  The young chap was
mighty thankful; said it was tough work toting his baggage such weather.
He asked the king where he was going, and the king told him he'd come
down the river and landed at the other village this morning, and now he
was going up a few mile to see an old friend on a farm up there.  The
young fellow says:

“When I first see you I says to myself, 'It's Mr. Wilks, sure, and he
come mighty near getting here in time.'  But then I says again, 'No, I
reckon it ain't him, or else he wouldn't be paddling up the river.'  You
_ain't_ him, are you?”

“No, my name's Blodgett--Elexander Blodgett--_Reverend_ Elexander
Blodgett, I s'pose I must say, as I'm one o' the Lord's poor servants.
 But still I'm jist as able to be sorry for Mr. Wilks for not arriving
in time, all the same, if he's missed anything by it--which I hope he
hasn't.”

“Well, he don't miss any property by it, because he'll get that all
right; but he's missed seeing his brother Peter die--which he mayn't
mind, nobody can tell as to that--but his brother would a give anything
in this world to see _him_ before he died; never talked about nothing
else all these three weeks; hadn't seen him since they was boys
together--and hadn't ever seen his brother William at all--that's the deef
and dumb one--William ain't more than thirty or thirty-five.  Peter and
George were the only ones that come out here; George was the married
brother; him and his wife both died last year.  Harvey and William's the
only ones that's left now; and, as I was saying, they haven't got here
in time.”

“Did anybody send 'em word?”

“Oh, yes; a month or two ago, when Peter was first took; because Peter
said then that he sorter felt like he warn't going to get well this
time. You see, he was pretty old, and George's g'yirls was too young to
be much company for him, except Mary Jane, the red-headed one; and so he
was kinder lonesome after George and his wife died, and didn't seem
to care much to live.  He most desperately wanted to see Harvey--and
William, too, for that matter--because he was one of them kind that can't
bear to make a will.  He left a letter behind for Harvey, and said he'd
told in it where his money was hid, and how he wanted the rest of the
property divided up so George's g'yirls would be all right--for George
didn't leave nothing.  And that letter was all they could get him to put
a pen to.”

“Why do you reckon Harvey don't come?  Wher' does he live?”

“Oh, he lives in England--Sheffield--preaches there--hasn't ever been in
this country.  He hasn't had any too much time--and besides he mightn't a
got the letter at all, you know.”

“Too bad, too bad he couldn't a lived to see his brothers, poor soul.
You going to Orleans, you say?”

“Yes, but that ain't only a part of it.  I'm going in a ship, next
Wednesday, for Ryo Janeero, where my uncle lives.”

“It's a pretty long journey.  But it'll be lovely; wisht I was a-going.
Is Mary Jane the oldest?  How old is the others?”

“Mary Jane's nineteen, Susan's fifteen, and Joanna's about
fourteen--that's the one that gives herself to good works and has a
hare-lip.”

“Poor things! to be left alone in the cold world so.”

“Well, they could be worse off.  Old Peter had friends, and they
ain't going to let them come to no harm.  There's Hobson, the Babtis'
preacher; and Deacon Lot Hovey, and Ben Rucker, and Abner Shackleford,
and Levi Bell, the lawyer; and Dr. Robinson, and their wives, and the
widow Bartley, and--well, there's a lot of them; but these are the ones
that Peter was thickest with, and used to write about sometimes, when
he wrote home; so Harvey 'll know where to look for friends when he gets
here.”

Well, the old man went on asking questions till he just fairly emptied
that young fellow.  Blamed if he didn't inquire about everybody and
everything in that blessed town, and all about the Wilkses; and about
Peter's business--which was a tanner; and about George's--which was a
carpenter; and about Harvey's--which was a dissentering minister; and so
on, and so on.  Then he says:

“What did you want to walk all the way up to the steamboat for?”

“Because she's a big Orleans boat, and I was afeard she mightn't stop
there.  When they're deep they won't stop for a hail.  A Cincinnati boat
will, but this is a St. Louis one.”

“Was Peter Wilks well off?”

“Oh, yes, pretty well off.  He had houses and land, and it's reckoned he
left three or four thousand in cash hid up som'ers.”

“When did you say he died?”

“I didn't say, but it was last night.”

“Funeral to-morrow, likely?”

“Yes, 'bout the middle of the day.”

“Well, it's all terrible sad; but we've all got to go, one time or
another. So what we want to do is to be prepared; then we're all right.”

“Yes, sir, it's the best way.  Ma used to always say that.”

When we struck the boat she was about done loading, and pretty soon she
got off.  The king never said nothing about going aboard, so I lost
my ride, after all.  When the boat was gone the king made me paddle up
another mile to a lonesome place, and then he got ashore and says:

“Now hustle back, right off, and fetch the duke up here, and the new
carpet-bags.  And if he's gone over to t'other side, go over there and
git him.  And tell him to git himself up regardless.  Shove along, now.”

I see what _he_ was up to; but I never said nothing, of course.  When
I got back with the duke we hid the canoe, and then they set down on a
log, and the king told him everything, just like the young fellow had
said it--every last word of it.  And all the time he was a-doing it he
tried to talk like an Englishman; and he done it pretty well, too, for
a slouch. I can't imitate him, and so I ain't a-going to try to; but he
really done it pretty good.  Then he says:

“How are you on the deef and dumb, Bilgewater?”

The duke said, leave him alone for that; said he had played a deef
and dumb person on the histronic boards.  So then they waited for a
steamboat.

About the middle of the afternoon a couple of little boats come along,
but they didn't come from high enough up the river; but at last there
was a big one, and they hailed her.  She sent out her yawl, and we went
aboard, and she was from Cincinnati; and when they found we only wanted
to go four or five mile they was booming mad, and gave us a cussing, and
said they wouldn't land us.  But the king was ca'm.  He says:

“If gentlemen kin afford to pay a dollar a mile apiece to be took on and
put off in a yawl, a steamboat kin afford to carry 'em, can't it?”

So they softened down and said it was all right; and when we got to the
village they yawled us ashore.  About two dozen men flocked down when
they see the yawl a-coming, and when the king says:

“Kin any of you gentlemen tell me wher' Mr. Peter Wilks lives?” they
give a glance at one another, and nodded their heads, as much as to say,
“What d' I tell you?”  Then one of them says, kind of soft and gentle:

“I'm sorry sir, but the best we can do is to tell you where he _did_
live yesterday evening.”

Sudden as winking the ornery old cretur went an to smash, and fell up
against the man, and put his chin on his shoulder, and cried down his
back, and says:

“Alas, alas, our poor brother--gone, and we never got to see him; oh,
it's too, too hard!”

Then he turns around, blubbering, and makes a lot of idiotic signs to
the duke on his hands, and blamed if he didn't drop a carpet-bag and
bust out a-crying.  If they warn't the beatenest lot, them two frauds,
that ever I struck.

Well, the men gathered around and sympathized with them, and said all
sorts of kind things to them, and carried their carpet-bags up the hill
for them, and let them lean on them and cry, and told the king all about
his brother's last moments, and the king he told it all over again on
his hands to the duke, and both of them took on about that dead tanner
like they'd lost the twelve disciples.  Well, if ever I struck anything
like it, I'm a nigger. It was enough to make a body ashamed of the human
race.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE news was all over town in two minutes, and you could see the people
tearing down on the run from every which way, some of them putting on
their coats as they come.  Pretty soon we was in the middle of a crowd,
and the noise of the tramping was like a soldier march.  The windows and
dooryards was full; and every minute somebody would say, over a fence:

“Is it _them_?”

And somebody trotting along with the gang would answer back and say:

“You bet it is.”

When we got to the house the street in front of it was packed, and the
three girls was standing in the door.  Mary Jane _was_ red-headed, but
that don't make no difference, she was most awful beautiful, and her
face and her eyes was all lit up like glory, she was so glad her uncles
was come. The king he spread his arms, and Mary Jane she jumped for
them, and the hare-lip jumped for the duke, and there they had it!
 Everybody most, leastways women, cried for joy to see them meet again
at last and have such good times.

Then the king he hunched the duke private--I see him do it--and then he
looked around and see the coffin, over in the corner on two chairs; so
then him and the duke, with a hand across each other's shoulder, and
t'other hand to their eyes, walked slow and solemn over there, everybody
dropping back to give them room, and all the talk and noise stopping,
people saying “Sh!” and all the men taking their hats off and drooping
their heads, so you could a heard a pin fall.  And when they got there
they bent over and looked in the coffin, and took one sight, and then
they bust out a-crying so you could a heard them to Orleans, most; and
then they put their arms around each other's necks, and hung their chins
over each other's shoulders; and then for three minutes, or maybe four,
I never see two men leak the way they done.  And, mind you, everybody
was doing the same; and the place was that damp I never see anything
like it. Then one of them got on one side of the coffin, and t'other on
t'other side, and they kneeled down and rested their foreheads on the
coffin, and let on to pray all to themselves.  Well, when it come
to that it worked the crowd like you never see anything like it, and
everybody broke down and went to sobbing right out loud--the poor girls,
too; and every woman, nearly, went up to the girls, without saying a
word, and kissed them, solemn, on the forehead, and then put their hand
on their head, and looked up towards the sky, with the tears running
down, and then busted out and went off sobbing and swabbing, and give
the next woman a show.  I never see anything so disgusting.

Well, by and by the king he gets up and comes forward a little, and
works himself up and slobbers out a speech, all full of tears and
flapdoodle about its being a sore trial for him and his poor brother
to lose the diseased, and to miss seeing diseased alive after the long
journey of four thousand mile, but it's a trial that's sweetened and
sanctified to us by this dear sympathy and these holy tears, and so he
thanks them out of his heart and out of his brother's heart, because out
of their mouths they can't, words being too weak and cold, and all that
kind of rot and slush, till it was just sickening; and then he blubbers
out a pious goody-goody Amen, and turns himself loose and goes to crying
fit to bust.

And the minute the words were out of his mouth somebody over in the
crowd struck up the doxolojer, and everybody joined in with all their
might, and it just warmed you up and made you feel as good as church
letting out. Music is a good thing; and after all that soul-butter and
hogwash I never see it freshen up things so, and sound so honest and
bully.

Then the king begins to work his jaw again, and says how him and his
nieces would be glad if a few of the main principal friends of the
family would take supper here with them this evening, and help set up
with the ashes of the diseased; and says if his poor brother laying
yonder could speak he knows who he would name, for they was names that
was very dear to him, and mentioned often in his letters; and so he will
name the same, to wit, as follows, vizz.:--Rev. Mr. Hobson, and Deacon
Lot Hovey, and Mr. Ben Rucker, and Abner Shackleford, and Levi Bell, and
Dr. Robinson, and their wives, and the widow Bartley.

Rev. Hobson and Dr. Robinson was down to the end of the town a-hunting
together--that is, I mean the doctor was shipping a sick man to t'other
world, and the preacher was pinting him right.  Lawyer Bell was away up
to Louisville on business.  But the rest was on hand, and so they all
come and shook hands with the king and thanked him and talked to him;
and then they shook hands with the duke and didn't say nothing, but just
kept a-smiling and bobbing their heads like a passel of sapheads whilst
he made all sorts of signs with his hands and said “Goo-goo--goo-goo-goo”
 all the time, like a baby that can't talk.

So the king he blattered along, and managed to inquire about pretty
much everybody and dog in town, by his name, and mentioned all sorts
of little things that happened one time or another in the town, or to
George's family, or to Peter.  And he always let on that Peter wrote him
the things; but that was a lie:  he got every blessed one of them out of
that young flathead that we canoed up to the steamboat.

Then Mary Jane she fetched the letter her father left behind, and the
king he read it out loud and cried over it.  It give the dwelling-house
and three thousand dollars, gold, to the girls; and it give the tanyard
(which was doing a good business), along with some other houses and
land (worth about seven thousand), and three thousand dollars in gold
to Harvey and William, and told where the six thousand cash was hid down
cellar.  So these two frauds said they'd go and fetch it up, and have
everything square and above-board; and told me to come with a candle.
 We shut the cellar door behind us, and when they found the bag
they spilt it out on the floor, and it was a lovely sight, all them
yaller-boys.  My, the way the king's eyes did shine!  He slaps the duke
on the shoulder and says:

“Oh, _this_ ain't bully nor noth'n!  Oh, no, I reckon not!  Why,
_bully_, it beats the Nonesuch, _don't_ it?”

The duke allowed it did.  They pawed the yaller-boys, and sifted them
through their fingers and let them jingle down on the floor; and the
king says:

“It ain't no use talkin'; bein' brothers to a rich dead man and
representatives of furrin heirs that's got left is the line for you and
me, Bilge.  Thish yer comes of trust'n to Providence.  It's the best
way, in the long run.  I've tried 'em all, and ther' ain't no better
way.”

Most everybody would a been satisfied with the pile, and took it on
trust; but no, they must count it.  So they counts it, and it comes out
four hundred and fifteen dollars short.  Says the king:

“Dern him, I wonder what he done with that four hundred and fifteen
dollars?”

They worried over that awhile, and ransacked all around for it.  Then
the duke says:

“Well, he was a pretty sick man, and likely he made a mistake--I reckon
that's the way of it.  The best way's to let it go, and keep still about
it.  We can spare it.”

“Oh, shucks, yes, we can _spare_ it.  I don't k'yer noth'n 'bout
that--it's the _count_ I'm thinkin' about.  We want to be awful square
and open and above-board here, you know.  We want to lug this h-yer
money up stairs and count it before everybody--then ther' ain't noth'n
suspicious.  But when the dead man says ther's six thous'n dollars, you
know, we don't want to--”

“Hold on,” says the duke.  “Le's make up the deffisit,” and he begun to
haul out yaller-boys out of his pocket.

“It's a most amaz'n' good idea, duke--you _have_ got a rattlin' clever
head on you,” says the king.  “Blest if the old Nonesuch ain't a heppin'
us out agin,” and _he_ begun to haul out yaller-jackets and stack them
up.

It most busted them, but they made up the six thousand clean and clear.

“Say,” says the duke, “I got another idea.  Le's go up stairs and count
this money, and then take and _give it to the girls_.”

“Good land, duke, lemme hug you!  It's the most dazzling idea 'at ever a
man struck.  You have cert'nly got the most astonishin' head I ever see.
Oh, this is the boss dodge, ther' ain't no mistake 'bout it.  Let 'em
fetch along their suspicions now if they want to--this 'll lay 'em out.”

When we got up-stairs everybody gethered around the table, and the king
he counted it and stacked it up, three hundred dollars in a pile--twenty
elegant little piles.  Everybody looked hungry at it, and licked their
chops.  Then they raked it into the bag again, and I see the king begin
to swell himself up for another speech.  He says:

“Friends all, my poor brother that lays yonder has done generous by
them that's left behind in the vale of sorrers.  He has done generous by
these yer poor little lambs that he loved and sheltered, and that's left
fatherless and motherless.  Yes, and we that knowed him knows that he
would a done _more_ generous by 'em if he hadn't ben afeard o' woundin'
his dear William and me.  Now, _wouldn't_ he?  Ther' ain't no question
'bout it in _my_ mind.  Well, then, what kind o' brothers would it be
that 'd stand in his way at sech a time?  And what kind o' uncles would
it be that 'd rob--yes, _rob_--sech poor sweet lambs as these 'at he loved
so at sech a time?  If I know William--and I _think_ I do--he--well, I'll
jest ask him.” He turns around and begins to make a lot of signs to
the duke with his hands, and the duke he looks at him stupid and
leather-headed a while; then all of a sudden he seems to catch his
meaning, and jumps for the king, goo-gooing with all his might for joy,
and hugs him about fifteen times before he lets up.  Then the king says,
“I knowed it; I reckon _that 'll_ convince anybody the way _he_ feels
about it.  Here, Mary Jane, Susan, Joanner, take the money--take it
_all_.  It's the gift of him that lays yonder, cold but joyful.”

Mary Jane she went for him, Susan and the hare-lip went for the
duke, and then such another hugging and kissing I never see yet.  And
everybody crowded up with the tears in their eyes, and most shook the
hands off of them frauds, saying all the time:

“You _dear_ good souls!--how _lovely_!--how _could_ you!”

Well, then, pretty soon all hands got to talking about the diseased
again, and how good he was, and what a loss he was, and all that; and
before long a big iron-jawed man worked himself in there from outside,
and stood a-listening and looking, and not saying anything; and nobody
saying anything to him either, because the king was talking and they was
all busy listening.  The king was saying--in the middle of something he'd
started in on--

“--they bein' partickler friends o' the diseased.  That's why they're
invited here this evenin'; but tomorrow we want _all_ to come--everybody;
for he respected everybody, he liked everybody, and so it's fitten that
his funeral orgies sh'd be public.”

And so he went a-mooning on and on, liking to hear himself talk, and
every little while he fetched in his funeral orgies again, till the duke
he couldn't stand it no more; so he writes on a little scrap of paper,
“_Obsequies_, you old fool,” and folds it up, and goes to goo-gooing and
reaching it over people's heads to him.  The king he reads it and puts
it in his pocket, and says:

“Poor William, afflicted as he is, his _heart's_ aluz right.  Asks me
to invite everybody to come to the funeral--wants me to make 'em all
welcome.  But he needn't a worried--it was jest what I was at.”

Then he weaves along again, perfectly ca'm, and goes to dropping in his
funeral orgies again every now and then, just like he done before.  And
when he done it the third time he says:

“I say orgies, not because it's the common term, because it
ain't--obsequies bein' the common term--but because orgies is the right
term. Obsequies ain't used in England no more now--it's gone out.  We
say orgies now in England.  Orgies is better, because it means the thing
you're after more exact.  It's a word that's made up out'n the Greek
_orgo_, outside, open, abroad; and the Hebrew _jeesum_, to plant, cover
up; hence in_ter._  So, you see, funeral orgies is an open er public
funeral.”

He was the _worst_ I ever struck.  Well, the iron-jawed man he laughed
right in his face.  Everybody was shocked.  Everybody says, “Why,
_doctor_!” and Abner Shackleford says:

“Why, Robinson, hain't you heard the news?  This is Harvey Wilks.”

The king he smiled eager, and shoved out his flapper, and says:

“Is it my poor brother's dear good friend and physician?  I--”

“Keep your hands off of me!” says the doctor.  “_You_ talk like an
Englishman, _don't_ you?  It's the worst imitation I ever heard.  _You_
Peter Wilks's brother!  You're a fraud, that's what you are!”

Well, how they all took on!  They crowded around the doctor and tried to
quiet him down, and tried to explain to him and tell him how Harvey 'd
showed in forty ways that he _was_ Harvey, and knowed everybody by name,
and the names of the very dogs, and begged and _begged_ him not to hurt
Harvey's feelings and the poor girl's feelings, and all that.  But it
warn't no use; he stormed right along, and said any man that pretended
to be an Englishman and couldn't imitate the lingo no better than what
he did was a fraud and a liar.  The poor girls was hanging to the king
and crying; and all of a sudden the doctor ups and turns on _them_.  He
says:

“I was your father's friend, and I'm your friend; and I warn you as a
friend, and an honest one that wants to protect you and keep you out of
harm and trouble, to turn your backs on that scoundrel and have nothing
to do with him, the ignorant tramp, with his idiotic Greek and Hebrew,
as he calls it.  He is the thinnest kind of an impostor--has come here
with a lot of empty names and facts which he picked up somewheres, and
you take them for _proofs_, and are helped to fool yourselves by these
foolish friends here, who ought to know better.  Mary Jane Wilks, you
know me for your friend, and for your unselfish friend, too.  Now listen
to me; turn this pitiful rascal out--I _beg_ you to do it.  Will you?”

Mary Jane straightened herself up, and my, but she was handsome!  She
says:

“_Here_ is my answer.”  She hove up the bag of money and put it in the
king's hands, and says, “Take this six thousand dollars, and invest for
me and my sisters any way you want to, and don't give us no receipt for
it.”

Then she put her arm around the king on one side, and Susan and the
hare-lip done the same on the other.  Everybody clapped their hands and
stomped on the floor like a perfect storm, whilst the king held up his
head and smiled proud.  The doctor says:

“All right; I wash _my_ hands of the matter.  But I warn you all that a
time 's coming when you're going to feel sick whenever you think of this
day.” And away he went.

“All right, doctor,” says the king, kinder mocking him; “we'll try and
get 'em to send for you;” which made them all laugh, and they said it
was a prime good hit.




CHAPTER XXVI.

WELL, when they was all gone the king he asks Mary Jane how they was off
for spare rooms, and she said she had one spare room, which would do for
Uncle William, and she'd give her own room to Uncle Harvey, which was
a little bigger, and she would turn into the room with her sisters and
sleep on a cot; and up garret was a little cubby, with a pallet in it.
The king said the cubby would do for his valley--meaning me.

So Mary Jane took us up, and she showed them their rooms, which was
plain but nice.  She said she'd have her frocks and a lot of other traps
took out of her room if they was in Uncle Harvey's way, but he said
they warn't.  The frocks was hung along the wall, and before them was
a curtain made out of calico that hung down to the floor.  There was an
old hair trunk in one corner, and a guitar-box in another, and all sorts
of little knickknacks and jimcracks around, like girls brisken up a room
with.  The king said it was all the more homely and more pleasanter for
these fixings, and so don't disturb them.  The duke's room was pretty
small, but plenty good enough, and so was my cubby.

That night they had a big supper, and all them men and women was there,
and I stood behind the king and the duke's chairs and waited on them,
and the niggers waited on the rest.  Mary Jane she set at the head of
the table, with Susan alongside of her, and said how bad the biscuits
was, and how mean the preserves was, and how ornery and tough the fried
chickens was--and all that kind of rot, the way women always do for to
force out compliments; and the people all knowed everything was tiptop,
and said so--said “How _do_ you get biscuits to brown so nice?” and
“Where, for the land's sake, _did_ you get these amaz'n pickles?” and
all that kind of humbug talky-talk, just the way people always does at a
supper, you know.

And when it was all done me and the hare-lip had supper in the kitchen
off of the leavings, whilst the others was helping the niggers clean up
the things.  The hare-lip she got to pumping me about England, and blest
if I didn't think the ice was getting mighty thin sometimes.  She says:

“Did you ever see the king?”

“Who?  William Fourth?  Well, I bet I have--he goes to our church.”  I
knowed he was dead years ago, but I never let on.  So when I says he
goes to our church, she says:

“What--regular?”

“Yes--regular.  His pew's right over opposite ourn--on t'other side the
pulpit.”

“I thought he lived in London?”

“Well, he does.  Where _would_ he live?”

“But I thought _you_ lived in Sheffield?”

I see I was up a stump.  I had to let on to get choked with a chicken
bone, so as to get time to think how to get down again.  Then I says:

“I mean he goes to our church regular when he's in Sheffield.  That's
only in the summer time, when he comes there to take the sea baths.”

“Why, how you talk--Sheffield ain't on the sea.”

“Well, who said it was?”

“Why, you did.”

“I _didn't_ nuther.”

“You did!”

“I didn't.”

“You did.”

“I never said nothing of the kind.”

“Well, what _did_ you say, then?”

“Said he come to take the sea _baths_--that's what I said.”

“Well, then, how's he going to take the sea baths if it ain't on the
sea?”

“Looky here,” I says; “did you ever see any Congress-water?”

“Yes.”

“Well, did you have to go to Congress to get it?”

“Why, no.”

“Well, neither does William Fourth have to go to the sea to get a sea
bath.”

“How does he get it, then?”

“Gets it the way people down here gets Congress-water--in barrels.  There
in the palace at Sheffield they've got furnaces, and he wants his water
hot.  They can't bile that amount of water away off there at the sea.
They haven't got no conveniences for it.”

“Oh, I see, now.  You might a said that in the first place and saved
time.”

When she said that I see I was out of the woods again, and so I was
comfortable and glad.  Next, she says:

“Do you go to church, too?”

“Yes--regular.”

“Where do you set?”

“Why, in our pew.”

“_Whose_ pew?”

“Why, _ourn_--your Uncle Harvey's.”

“His'n?  What does _he_ want with a pew?”

“Wants it to set in.  What did you _reckon_ he wanted with it?”

“Why, I thought he'd be in the pulpit.”

Rot him, I forgot he was a preacher.  I see I was up a stump again, so I
played another chicken bone and got another think.  Then I says:

“Blame it, do you suppose there ain't but one preacher to a church?”

“Why, what do they want with more?”

“What!--to preach before a king?  I never did see such a girl as you.
They don't have no less than seventeen.”

“Seventeen!  My land!  Why, I wouldn't set out such a string as that,
not if I _never_ got to glory.  It must take 'em a week.”

“Shucks, they don't _all_ of 'em preach the same day--only _one_ of 'em.”

“Well, then, what does the rest of 'em do?”

“Oh, nothing much.  Loll around, pass the plate--and one thing or
another.  But mainly they don't do nothing.”

“Well, then, what are they _for_?”

“Why, they're for _style_.  Don't you know nothing?”

“Well, I don't _want_ to know no such foolishness as that.  How is
servants treated in England?  Do they treat 'em better 'n we treat our
niggers?”

“_No_!  A servant ain't nobody there.  They treat them worse than dogs.”

“Don't they give 'em holidays, the way we do, Christmas and New Year's
week, and Fourth of July?”

“Oh, just listen!  A body could tell _you_ hain't ever been to England
by that.  Why, Hare-l--why, Joanna, they never see a holiday from year's
end to year's end; never go to the circus, nor theater, nor nigger
shows, nor nowheres.”

“Nor church?”

“Nor church.”

“But _you_ always went to church.”

Well, I was gone up again.  I forgot I was the old man's servant.  But
next minute I whirled in on a kind of an explanation how a valley was
different from a common servant and _had_ to go to church whether he
wanted to or not, and set with the family, on account of its being the
law.  But I didn't do it pretty good, and when I got done I see she
warn't satisfied.  She says:

“Honest injun, now, hain't you been telling me a lot of lies?”

“Honest injun,” says I.

“None of it at all?”

“None of it at all.  Not a lie in it,” says I.

“Lay your hand on this book and say it.”

I see it warn't nothing but a dictionary, so I laid my hand on it and
said it.  So then she looked a little better satisfied, and says:

“Well, then, I'll believe some of it; but I hope to gracious if I'll
believe the rest.”

“What is it you won't believe, Joe?” says Mary Jane, stepping in with
Susan behind her.  “It ain't right nor kind for you to talk so to him,
and him a stranger and so far from his people.  How would you like to be
treated so?”

“That's always your way, Maim--always sailing in to help somebody before
they're hurt.  I hain't done nothing to him.  He's told some stretchers,
I reckon, and I said I wouldn't swallow it all; and that's every bit
and grain I _did_ say.  I reckon he can stand a little thing like that,
can't he?”

“I don't care whether 'twas little or whether 'twas big; he's here in
our house and a stranger, and it wasn't good of you to say it.  If you
was in his place it would make you feel ashamed; and so you oughtn't to
say a thing to another person that will make _them_ feel ashamed.”

“Why, Mam, he said--”

“It don't make no difference what he _said_--that ain't the thing.  The
thing is for you to treat him _kind_, and not be saying things to make
him remember he ain't in his own country and amongst his own folks.”

I says to myself, _this_ is a girl that I'm letting that old reptile rob
her of her money!

Then Susan _she_ waltzed in; and if you'll believe me, she did give
Hare-lip hark from the tomb!

Says I to myself, and this is _another_ one that I'm letting him rob her
of her money!

Then Mary Jane she took another inning, and went in sweet and lovely
again--which was her way; but when she got done there warn't hardly
anything left o' poor Hare-lip.  So she hollered.

“All right, then,” says the other girls; “you just ask his pardon.”

She done it, too; and she done it beautiful.  She done it so beautiful
it was good to hear; and I wished I could tell her a thousand lies, so
she could do it again.

I says to myself, this is _another_ one that I'm letting him rob her of
her money.  And when she got through they all jest laid theirselves
out to make me feel at home and know I was amongst friends.  I felt so
ornery and low down and mean that I says to myself, my mind's made up;
I'll hive that money for them or bust.

So then I lit out--for bed, I said, meaning some time or another.  When
I got by myself I went to thinking the thing over.  I says to myself,
shall I go to that doctor, private, and blow on these frauds?  No--that
won't do. He might tell who told him; then the king and the duke would
make it warm for me.  Shall I go, private, and tell Mary Jane?  No--I
dasn't do it. Her face would give them a hint, sure; they've got the
money, and they'd slide right out and get away with it.  If she was to
fetch in help I'd get mixed up in the business before it was done with,
I judge.  No; there ain't no good way but one.  I got to steal that
money, somehow; and I got to steal it some way that they won't suspicion
that I done it. They've got a good thing here, and they ain't a-going
to leave till they've played this family and this town for all they're
worth, so I'll find a chance time enough. I'll steal it and hide it; and
by and by, when I'm away down the river, I'll write a letter and tell
Mary Jane where it's hid.  But I better hive it tonight if I can,
because the doctor maybe hasn't let up as much as he lets on he has; he
might scare them out of here yet.

So, thinks I, I'll go and search them rooms.  Upstairs the hall was
dark, but I found the duke's room, and started to paw around it with
my hands; but I recollected it wouldn't be much like the king to let
anybody else take care of that money but his own self; so then I went to
his room and begun to paw around there.  But I see I couldn't do nothing
without a candle, and I dasn't light one, of course.  So I judged I'd
got to do the other thing--lay for them and eavesdrop.  About that time
I hears their footsteps coming, and was going to skip under the bed; I
reached for it, but it wasn't where I thought it would be; but I touched
the curtain that hid Mary Jane's frocks, so I jumped in behind that and
snuggled in amongst the gowns, and stood there perfectly still.

They come in and shut the door; and the first thing the duke done was to
get down and look under the bed.  Then I was glad I hadn't found the bed
when I wanted it.  And yet, you know, it's kind of natural to hide under
the bed when you are up to anything private.  They sets down then, and
the king says:

“Well, what is it?  And cut it middlin' short, because it's better for
us to be down there a-whoopin' up the mournin' than up here givin' 'em a
chance to talk us over.”

“Well, this is it, Capet.  I ain't easy; I ain't comfortable.  That
doctor lays on my mind.  I wanted to know your plans.  I've got a
notion, and I think it's a sound one.”

“What is it, duke?”

“That we better glide out of this before three in the morning, and clip
it down the river with what we've got.  Specially, seeing we got it so
easy--_given_ back to us, flung at our heads, as you may say, when of
course we allowed to have to steal it back.  I'm for knocking off and
lighting out.”

That made me feel pretty bad.  About an hour or two ago it would a been
a little different, but now it made me feel bad and disappointed, The
king rips out and says:

“What!  And not sell out the rest o' the property?  March off like
a passel of fools and leave eight or nine thous'n' dollars' worth o'
property layin' around jest sufferin' to be scooped in?--and all good,
salable stuff, too.”

The duke he grumbled; said the bag of gold was enough, and he didn't
want to go no deeper--didn't want to rob a lot of orphans of _everything_
they had.

“Why, how you talk!” says the king.  “We sha'n't rob 'em of nothing at
all but jest this money.  The people that _buys_ the property is the
suff'rers; because as soon 's it's found out 'at we didn't own it--which
won't be long after we've slid--the sale won't be valid, and it 'll all
go back to the estate.  These yer orphans 'll git their house back agin,
and that's enough for _them_; they're young and spry, and k'n easy
earn a livin'.  _they_ ain't a-goin to suffer.  Why, jest think--there's
thous'n's and thous'n's that ain't nigh so well off.  Bless you, _they_
ain't got noth'n' to complain of.”

Well, the king he talked him blind; so at last he give in, and said all
right, but said he believed it was blamed foolishness to stay, and that
doctor hanging over them.  But the king says:

“Cuss the doctor!  What do we k'yer for _him_?  Hain't we got all the
fools in town on our side?  And ain't that a big enough majority in any
town?”

So they got ready to go down stairs again.  The duke says:

“I don't think we put that money in a good place.”

That cheered me up.  I'd begun to think I warn't going to get a hint of
no kind to help me.  The king says:

“Why?”

“Because Mary Jane 'll be in mourning from this out; and first you know
the nigger that does up the rooms will get an order to box these duds
up and put 'em away; and do you reckon a nigger can run across money and
not borrow some of it?”

“Your head's level agin, duke,” says the king; and he comes a-fumbling
under the curtain two or three foot from where I was.  I stuck tight to
the wall and kept mighty still, though quivery; and I wondered what them
fellows would say to me if they catched me; and I tried to think what
I'd better do if they did catch me.  But the king he got the bag before
I could think more than about a half a thought, and he never suspicioned
I was around.  They took and shoved the bag through a rip in the straw
tick that was under the feather-bed, and crammed it in a foot or two
amongst the straw and said it was all right now, because a nigger only
makes up the feather-bed, and don't turn over the straw tick only about
twice a year, and so it warn't in no danger of getting stole now.

But I knowed better.  I had it out of there before they was half-way
down stairs.  I groped along up to my cubby, and hid it there till I
could get a chance to do better.  I judged I better hide it outside
of the house somewheres, because if they missed it they would give the
house a good ransacking:  I knowed that very well.  Then I turned in,
with my clothes all on; but I couldn't a gone to sleep if I'd a wanted
to, I was in such a sweat to get through with the business.  By and by I
heard the king and the duke come up; so I rolled off my pallet and laid
with my chin at the top of my ladder, and waited to see if anything was
going to happen.  But nothing did.

So I held on till all the late sounds had quit and the early ones hadn't
begun yet; and then I slipped down the ladder.




CHAPTER XXVII.

I crept to their doors and listened; they was snoring.  So I tiptoed
along, and got down stairs all right.  There warn't a sound anywheres.
 I peeped through a crack of the dining-room door, and see the men that
was watching the corpse all sound asleep on their chairs.  The door
was open into the parlor, where the corpse was laying, and there was a
candle in both rooms. I passed along, and the parlor door was open; but
I see there warn't nobody in there but the remainders of Peter; so I
shoved on by; but the front door was locked, and the key wasn't there.
 Just then I heard somebody coming down the stairs, back behind me.  I
run in the parlor and took a swift look around, and the only place I
see to hide the bag was in the coffin.  The lid was shoved along about
a foot, showing the dead man's face down in there, with a wet cloth over
it, and his shroud on.  I tucked the money-bag in under the lid, just
down beyond where his hands was crossed, which made me creep, they was
so cold, and then I run back across the room and in behind the door.

The person coming was Mary Jane.  She went to the coffin, very soft, and
kneeled down and looked in; then she put up her handkerchief, and I see
she begun to cry, though I couldn't hear her, and her back was to me.  I
slid out, and as I passed the dining-room I thought I'd make sure them
watchers hadn't seen me; so I looked through the crack, and everything
was all right.  They hadn't stirred.

I slipped up to bed, feeling ruther blue, on accounts of the thing
playing out that way after I had took so much trouble and run so much
resk about it.  Says I, if it could stay where it is, all right; because
when we get down the river a hundred mile or two I could write back to
Mary Jane, and she could dig him up again and get it; but that ain't the
thing that's going to happen; the thing that's going to happen is, the
money 'll be found when they come to screw on the lid.  Then the king
'll get it again, and it 'll be a long day before he gives anybody
another chance to smouch it from him. Of course I _wanted_ to slide
down and get it out of there, but I dasn't try it.  Every minute it was
getting earlier now, and pretty soon some of them watchers would begin
to stir, and I might get catched--catched with six thousand dollars in my
hands that nobody hadn't hired me to take care of.  I don't wish to be
mixed up in no such business as that, I says to myself.

When I got down stairs in the morning the parlor was shut up, and the
watchers was gone.  There warn't nobody around but the family and the
widow Bartley and our tribe.  I watched their faces to see if anything
had been happening, but I couldn't tell.

Towards the middle of the day the undertaker come with his man, and they
set the coffin in the middle of the room on a couple of chairs, and then
set all our chairs in rows, and borrowed more from the neighbors till
the hall and the parlor and the dining-room was full.  I see the coffin
lid was the way it was before, but I dasn't go to look in under it, with
folks around.

Then the people begun to flock in, and the beats and the girls took
seats in the front row at the head of the coffin, and for a half an hour
the people filed around slow, in single rank, and looked down at the
dead man's face a minute, and some dropped in a tear, and it was
all very still and solemn, only the girls and the beats holding
handkerchiefs to their eyes and keeping their heads bent, and sobbing a
little.  There warn't no other sound but the scraping of the feet on
the floor and blowing noses--because people always blows them more at a
funeral than they do at other places except church.

When the place was packed full the undertaker he slid around in his
black gloves with his softy soothering ways, putting on the last
touches, and getting people and things all ship-shape and comfortable,
and making no more sound than a cat.  He never spoke; he moved people
around, he squeezed in late ones, he opened up passageways, and done
it with nods, and signs with his hands.  Then he took his place over
against the wall. He was the softest, glidingest, stealthiest man I ever
see; and there warn't no more smile to him than there is to a ham.

They had borrowed a melodeum--a sick one; and when everything was ready
a young woman set down and worked it, and it was pretty skreeky and
colicky, and everybody joined in and sung, and Peter was the only one
that had a good thing, according to my notion.  Then the Reverend Hobson
opened up, slow and solemn, and begun to talk; and straight off the most
outrageous row busted out in the cellar a body ever heard; it was only
one dog, but he made a most powerful racket, and he kept it up right
along; the parson he had to stand there, over the coffin, and wait--you
couldn't hear yourself think.  It was right down awkward, and nobody
didn't seem to know what to do.  But pretty soon they see that
long-legged undertaker make a sign to the preacher as much as to say,
“Don't you worry--just depend on me.”  Then he stooped down and begun
to glide along the wall, just his shoulders showing over the people's
heads.  So he glided along, and the powwow and racket getting more and
more outrageous all the time; and at last, when he had gone around two
sides of the room, he disappears down cellar.  Then in about two seconds
we heard a whack, and the dog he finished up with a most amazing howl or
two, and then everything was dead still, and the parson begun his solemn
talk where he left off.  In a minute or two here comes this undertaker's
back and shoulders gliding along the wall again; and so he glided and
glided around three sides of the room, and then rose up, and shaded his
mouth with his hands, and stretched his neck out towards the preacher,
over the people's heads, and says, in a kind of a coarse whisper, “_He
had a rat_!”  Then he drooped down and glided along the wall again to
his place.  You could see it was a great satisfaction to the people,
because naturally they wanted to know.  A little thing like that don't
cost nothing, and it's just the little things that makes a man to be
looked up to and liked.  There warn't no more popular man in town than
what that undertaker was.

Well, the funeral sermon was very good, but pison long and tiresome; and
then the king he shoved in and got off some of his usual rubbage, and
at last the job was through, and the undertaker begun to sneak up on the
coffin with his screw-driver.  I was in a sweat then, and watched him
pretty keen. But he never meddled at all; just slid the lid along as
soft as mush, and screwed it down tight and fast.  So there I was!  I
didn't know whether the money was in there or not.  So, says I, s'pose
somebody has hogged that bag on the sly?--now how do I know whether
to write to Mary Jane or not? S'pose she dug him up and didn't find
nothing, what would she think of me? Blame it, I says, I might get
hunted up and jailed; I'd better lay low and keep dark, and not write at
all; the thing's awful mixed now; trying to better it, I've worsened it
a hundred times, and I wish to goodness I'd just let it alone, dad fetch
the whole business!

They buried him, and we come back home, and I went to watching faces
again--I couldn't help it, and I couldn't rest easy.  But nothing come of
it; the faces didn't tell me nothing.

The king he visited around in the evening, and sweetened everybody up,
and made himself ever so friendly; and he give out the idea that his
congregation over in England would be in a sweat about him, so he must
hurry and settle up the estate right away and leave for home.  He was
very sorry he was so pushed, and so was everybody; they wished he could
stay longer, but they said they could see it couldn't be done.  And he
said of course him and William would take the girls home with them; and
that pleased everybody too, because then the girls would be well fixed
and amongst their own relations; and it pleased the girls, too--tickled
them so they clean forgot they ever had a trouble in the world; and told
him to sell out as quick as he wanted to, they would be ready.  Them
poor things was that glad and happy it made my heart ache to see them
getting fooled and lied to so, but I didn't see no safe way for me to
chip in and change the general tune.

Well, blamed if the king didn't bill the house and the niggers and all
the property for auction straight off--sale two days after the funeral;
but anybody could buy private beforehand if they wanted to.

So the next day after the funeral, along about noon-time, the girls' joy
got the first jolt.  A couple of nigger traders come along, and the king
sold them the niggers reasonable, for three-day drafts as they called
it, and away they went, the two sons up the river to Memphis, and their
mother down the river to Orleans.  I thought them poor girls and them
niggers would break their hearts for grief; they cried around each
other, and took on so it most made me down sick to see it.  The girls
said they hadn't ever dreamed of seeing the family separated or sold
away from the town.  I can't ever get it out of my memory, the sight of
them poor miserable girls and niggers hanging around each other's necks
and crying; and I reckon I couldn't a stood it all, but would a had
to bust out and tell on our gang if I hadn't knowed the sale warn't no
account and the niggers would be back home in a week or two.

The thing made a big stir in the town, too, and a good many come out
flatfooted and said it was scandalous to separate the mother and the
children that way.  It injured the frauds some; but the old fool he
bulled right along, spite of all the duke could say or do, and I tell
you the duke was powerful uneasy.

Next day was auction day.  About broad day in the morning the king and
the duke come up in the garret and woke me up, and I see by their look
that there was trouble.  The king says:

“Was you in my room night before last?”

“No, your majesty”--which was the way I always called him when nobody but
our gang warn't around.

“Was you in there yisterday er last night?”

“No, your majesty.”

“Honor bright, now--no lies.”

“Honor bright, your majesty, I'm telling you the truth.  I hain't been
a-near your room since Miss Mary Jane took you and the duke and showed
it to you.”

The duke says:

“Have you seen anybody else go in there?”

“No, your grace, not as I remember, I believe.”

“Stop and think.”

I studied awhile and see my chance; then I says:

“Well, I see the niggers go in there several times.”

Both of them gave a little jump, and looked like they hadn't ever
expected it, and then like they _had_.  Then the duke says:

“What, all of them?”

“No--leastways, not all at once--that is, I don't think I ever see them
all come _out_ at once but just one time.”

“Hello!  When was that?”

“It was the day we had the funeral.  In the morning.  It warn't early,
because I overslept.  I was just starting down the ladder, and I see
them.”

“Well, go on, _go_ on!  What did they do?  How'd they act?”

“They didn't do nothing.  And they didn't act anyway much, as fur as I
see. They tiptoed away; so I seen, easy enough, that they'd shoved in
there to do up your majesty's room, or something, s'posing you was up;
and found you _warn't_ up, and so they was hoping to slide out of the
way of trouble without waking you up, if they hadn't already waked you
up.”

“Great guns, _this_ is a go!” says the king; and both of them looked
pretty sick and tolerable silly.  They stood there a-thinking and
scratching their heads a minute, and the duke he bust into a kind of a
little raspy chuckle, and says:

“It does beat all how neat the niggers played their hand.  They let on
to be _sorry_ they was going out of this region!  And I believed they
_was_ sorry, and so did you, and so did everybody.  Don't ever tell _me_
any more that a nigger ain't got any histrionic talent.  Why, the way
they played that thing it would fool _anybody_.  In my opinion, there's
a fortune in 'em.  If I had capital and a theater, I wouldn't want a
better lay-out than that--and here we've gone and sold 'em for a song.
 Yes, and ain't privileged to sing the song yet.  Say, where _is_ that
song--that draft?”

“In the bank for to be collected.  Where _would_ it be?”

“Well, _that's_ all right then, thank goodness.”

Says I, kind of timid-like:

“Is something gone wrong?”

The king whirls on me and rips out:

“None o' your business!  You keep your head shet, and mind y'r own
affairs--if you got any.  Long as you're in this town don't you forgit
_that_--you hear?”  Then he says to the duke, “We got to jest swaller it
and say noth'n':  mum's the word for _us_.”

As they was starting down the ladder the duke he chuckles again, and
says:

“Quick sales _and_ small profits!  It's a good business--yes.”

The king snarls around on him and says:

“I was trying to do for the best in sellin' 'em out so quick.  If the
profits has turned out to be none, lackin' considable, and none to
carry, is it my fault any more'n it's yourn?”

“Well, _they'd_ be in this house yet and we _wouldn't_ if I could a got
my advice listened to.”

The king sassed back as much as was safe for him, and then swapped
around and lit into _me_ again.  He give me down the banks for not
coming and _telling_ him I see the niggers come out of his room acting
that way--said any fool would a _knowed_ something was up.  And then
waltzed in and cussed _himself_ awhile, and said it all come of him not
laying late and taking his natural rest that morning, and he'd be
blamed if he'd ever do it again.  So they went off a-jawing; and I felt
dreadful glad I'd worked it all off on to the niggers, and yet hadn't
done the niggers no harm by it.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

BY and by it was getting-up time.  So I come down the ladder and started
for down-stairs; but as I come to the girls' room the door was open, and
I see Mary Jane setting by her old hair trunk, which was open and she'd
been packing things in it--getting ready to go to England.  But she
had stopped now with a folded gown in her lap, and had her face in her
hands, crying.  I felt awful bad to see it; of course anybody would.  I
went in there and says:

“Miss Mary Jane, you can't a-bear to see people in trouble, and I
can't--most always.  Tell me about it.”

So she done it.  And it was the niggers--I just expected it.  She said
the beautiful trip to England was most about spoiled for her; she didn't
know _how_ she was ever going to be happy there, knowing the mother and
the children warn't ever going to see each other no more--and then busted
out bitterer than ever, and flung up her hands, and says:

“Oh, dear, dear, to think they ain't _ever_ going to see each other any
more!”

“But they _will_--and inside of two weeks--and I _know_ it!” says I.

Laws, it was out before I could think!  And before I could budge she
throws her arms around my neck and told me to say it _again_, say it
_again_, say it _again_!

I see I had spoke too sudden and said too much, and was in a close
place. I asked her to let me think a minute; and she set there, very
impatient and excited and handsome, but looking kind of happy and
eased-up, like a person that's had a tooth pulled out.  So I went to
studying it out.  I says to myself, I reckon a body that ups and tells
the truth when he is in a tight place is taking considerable many resks,
though I ain't had no experience, and can't say for certain; but it
looks so to me, anyway; and yet here's a case where I'm blest if it
don't look to me like the truth is better and actuly _safer_ than a lie.
 I must lay it by in my mind, and think it over some time or other, it's
so kind of strange and unregular. I never see nothing like it.  Well, I
says to myself at last, I'm a-going to chance it; I'll up and tell the
truth this time, though it does seem most like setting down on a kag of
powder and touching it off just to see where you'll go to. Then I says:

“Miss Mary Jane, is there any place out of town a little ways where you
could go and stay three or four days?”

“Yes; Mr. Lothrop's.  Why?”

“Never mind why yet.  If I'll tell you how I know the niggers will see
each other again inside of two weeks--here in this house--and _prove_ how
I know it--will you go to Mr. Lothrop's and stay four days?”

“Four days!” she says; “I'll stay a year!”

“All right,” I says, “I don't want nothing more out of _you_ than just
your word--I druther have it than another man's kiss-the-Bible.”  She
smiled and reddened up very sweet, and I says, “If you don't mind it,
I'll shut the door--and bolt it.”

Then I come back and set down again, and says:

“Don't you holler.  Just set still and take it like a man.  I got to
tell the truth, and you want to brace up, Miss Mary, because it's a
bad kind, and going to be hard to take, but there ain't no help for
it.  These uncles of yourn ain't no uncles at all; they're a couple of
frauds--regular dead-beats.  There, now we're over the worst of it, you
can stand the rest middling easy.”

It jolted her up like everything, of course; but I was over the shoal
water now, so I went right along, her eyes a-blazing higher and higher
all the time, and told her every blame thing, from where we first struck
that young fool going up to the steamboat, clear through to where she
flung herself on to the king's breast at the front door and he kissed
her sixteen or seventeen times--and then up she jumps, with her face
afire like sunset, and says:

“The brute!  Come, don't waste a minute--not a _second_--we'll have them
tarred and feathered, and flung in the river!”

Says I:

“Cert'nly.  But do you mean _before_ you go to Mr. Lothrop's, or--”

“Oh,” she says, “what am I _thinking_ about!” she says, and set right
down again.  “Don't mind what I said--please don't--you _won't,_ now,
_will_ you?” Laying her silky hand on mine in that kind of a way that
I said I would die first.  “I never thought, I was so stirred up,” she
says; “now go on, and I won't do so any more.  You tell me what to do,
and whatever you say I'll do it.”

“Well,” I says, “it's a rough gang, them two frauds, and I'm fixed so
I got to travel with them a while longer, whether I want to or not--I
druther not tell you why; and if you was to blow on them this town would
get me out of their claws, and I'd be all right; but there'd be another
person that you don't know about who'd be in big trouble.  Well, we
got to save _him_, hain't we?  Of course.  Well, then, we won't blow on
them.”

Saying them words put a good idea in my head.  I see how maybe I could
get me and Jim rid of the frauds; get them jailed here, and then leave.
But I didn't want to run the raft in the daytime without anybody aboard
to answer questions but me; so I didn't want the plan to begin working
till pretty late to-night.  I says:

“Miss Mary Jane, I'll tell you what we'll do, and you won't have to stay
at Mr. Lothrop's so long, nuther.  How fur is it?”

“A little short of four miles--right out in the country, back here.”

“Well, that 'll answer.  Now you go along out there, and lay low
till nine or half-past to-night, and then get them to fetch you home
again--tell them you've thought of something.  If you get here before
eleven put a candle in this window, and if I don't turn up wait _till_
eleven, and _then_ if I don't turn up it means I'm gone, and out of the
way, and safe. Then you come out and spread the news around, and get
these beats jailed.”

“Good,” she says, “I'll do it.”

“And if it just happens so that I don't get away, but get took up along
with them, you must up and say I told you the whole thing beforehand,
and you must stand by me all you can.”

“Stand by you! indeed I will.  They sha'n't touch a hair of your head!”
 she says, and I see her nostrils spread and her eyes snap when she said
it, too.

“If I get away I sha'n't be here,” I says, “to prove these rapscallions
ain't your uncles, and I couldn't do it if I _was_ here.  I could swear
they was beats and bummers, that's all, though that's worth something.
Well, there's others can do that better than what I can, and they're
people that ain't going to be doubted as quick as I'd be.  I'll tell you
how to find them.  Gimme a pencil and a piece of paper.  There--'Royal
Nonesuch, Bricksville.'  Put it away, and don't lose it.  When the
court wants to find out something about these two, let them send up to
Bricksville and say they've got the men that played the Royal Nonesuch,
and ask for some witnesses--why, you'll have that entire town down here
before you can hardly wink, Miss Mary.  And they'll come a-biling, too.”

I judged we had got everything fixed about right now.  So I says:

“Just let the auction go right along, and don't worry.  Nobody don't
have to pay for the things they buy till a whole day after the auction
on accounts of the short notice, and they ain't going out of this till
they get that money; and the way we've fixed it the sale ain't going to
count, and they ain't going to get no money.  It's just like the way
it was with the niggers--it warn't no sale, and the niggers will be
back before long.  Why, they can't collect the money for the _niggers_
yet--they're in the worst kind of a fix, Miss Mary.”

“Well,” she says, “I'll run down to breakfast now, and then I'll start
straight for Mr. Lothrop's.”

“'Deed, _that_ ain't the ticket, Miss Mary Jane,” I says, “by no manner
of means; go _before_ breakfast.”

“Why?”

“What did you reckon I wanted you to go at all for, Miss Mary?”

“Well, I never thought--and come to think, I don't know.  What was it?”

“Why, it's because you ain't one of these leather-face people.  I don't
want no better book than what your face is.  A body can set down and
read it off like coarse print.  Do you reckon you can go and face your
uncles when they come to kiss you good-morning, and never--”

“There, there, don't!  Yes, I'll go before breakfast--I'll be glad to.
And leave my sisters with them?”

“Yes; never mind about them.  They've got to stand it yet a while.  They
might suspicion something if all of you was to go.  I don't want you to
see them, nor your sisters, nor nobody in this town; if a neighbor was
to ask how is your uncles this morning your face would tell something.
 No, you go right along, Miss Mary Jane, and I'll fix it with all of
them. I'll tell Miss Susan to give your love to your uncles and say
you've went away for a few hours for to get a little rest and change, or
to see a friend, and you'll be back to-night or early in the morning.”

“Gone to see a friend is all right, but I won't have my love given to
them.”

“Well, then, it sha'n't be.”  It was well enough to tell _her_ so--no
harm in it.  It was only a little thing to do, and no trouble; and it's
the little things that smooths people's roads the most, down here below;
it would make Mary Jane comfortable, and it wouldn't cost nothing.  Then
I says:  “There's one more thing--that bag of money.”

“Well, they've got that; and it makes me feel pretty silly to think
_how_ they got it.”

“No, you're out, there.  They hain't got it.”

“Why, who's got it?”

“I wish I knowed, but I don't.  I _had_ it, because I stole it from
them; and I stole it to give to you; and I know where I hid it, but I'm
afraid it ain't there no more.  I'm awful sorry, Miss Mary Jane, I'm
just as sorry as I can be; but I done the best I could; I did honest.  I
come nigh getting caught, and I had to shove it into the first place I
come to, and run--and it warn't a good place.”

“Oh, stop blaming yourself--it's too bad to do it, and I won't allow
it--you couldn't help it; it wasn't your fault.  Where did you hide it?”

I didn't want to set her to thinking about her troubles again; and I
couldn't seem to get my mouth to tell her what would make her see that
corpse laying in the coffin with that bag of money on his stomach.  So
for a minute I didn't say nothing; then I says:

“I'd ruther not _tell_ you where I put it, Miss Mary Jane, if you don't
mind letting me off; but I'll write it for you on a piece of paper, and
you can read it along the road to Mr. Lothrop's, if you want to.  Do you
reckon that 'll do?”

“Oh, yes.”

So I wrote:  “I put it in the coffin.  It was in there when you was
crying there, away in the night.  I was behind the door, and I was
mighty sorry for you, Miss Mary Jane.”

It made my eyes water a little to remember her crying there all by
herself in the night, and them devils laying there right under her own
roof, shaming her and robbing her; and when I folded it up and give it
to her I see the water come into her eyes, too; and she shook me by the
hand, hard, and says:

“_Good_-bye.  I'm going to do everything just as you've told me; and if
I don't ever see you again, I sha'n't ever forget you and I'll think of
you a many and a many a time, and I'll _pray_ for you, too!”--and she was
gone.

Pray for me!  I reckoned if she knowed me she'd take a job that was more
nearer her size.  But I bet she done it, just the same--she was just that
kind.  She had the grit to pray for Judus if she took the notion--there
warn't no back-down to her, I judge.  You may say what you want to, but
in my opinion she had more sand in her than any girl I ever see; in
my opinion she was just full of sand.  It sounds like flattery, but it
ain't no flattery.  And when it comes to beauty--and goodness, too--she
lays over them all.  I hain't ever seen her since that time that I see
her go out of that door; no, I hain't ever seen her since, but I reckon
I've thought of her a many and a many a million times, and of her saying
she would pray for me; and if ever I'd a thought it would do any good
for me to pray for _her_, blamed if I wouldn't a done it or bust.

Well, Mary Jane she lit out the back way, I reckon; because nobody see
her go.  When I struck Susan and the hare-lip, I says:

“What's the name of them people over on t'other side of the river that
you all goes to see sometimes?”

They says:

“There's several; but it's the Proctors, mainly.”

“That's the name,” I says; “I most forgot it.  Well, Miss Mary Jane she
told me to tell you she's gone over there in a dreadful hurry--one of
them's sick.”

“Which one?”

“I don't know; leastways, I kinder forget; but I thinks it's--”

“Sakes alive, I hope it ain't _Hanner_?”

“I'm sorry to say it,” I says, “but Hanner's the very one.”

“My goodness, and she so well only last week!  Is she took bad?”

“It ain't no name for it.  They set up with her all night, Miss Mary
Jane said, and they don't think she'll last many hours.”

“Only think of that, now!  What's the matter with her?”

I couldn't think of anything reasonable, right off that way, so I says:

“Mumps.”

“Mumps your granny!  They don't set up with people that's got the
mumps.”

“They don't, don't they?  You better bet they do with _these_ mumps.
 These mumps is different.  It's a new kind, Miss Mary Jane said.”

“How's it a new kind?”

“Because it's mixed up with other things.”

“What other things?”

“Well, measles, and whooping-cough, and erysiplas, and consumption, and
yaller janders, and brain-fever, and I don't know what all.”

“My land!  And they call it the _mumps_?”

“That's what Miss Mary Jane said.”

“Well, what in the nation do they call it the _mumps_ for?”

“Why, because it _is_ the mumps.  That's what it starts with.”

“Well, ther' ain't no sense in it.  A body might stump his toe, and take
pison, and fall down the well, and break his neck, and bust his brains
out, and somebody come along and ask what killed him, and some numskull
up and say, 'Why, he stumped his _toe_.'  Would ther' be any sense
in that? _No_.  And ther' ain't no sense in _this_, nuther.  Is it
ketching?”

“Is it _ketching_?  Why, how you talk.  Is a _harrow_ catching--in the
dark? If you don't hitch on to one tooth, you're bound to on another,
ain't you? And you can't get away with that tooth without fetching the
whole harrow along, can you?  Well, these kind of mumps is a kind of a
harrow, as you may say--and it ain't no slouch of a harrow, nuther, you
come to get it hitched on good.”

“Well, it's awful, I think,” says the hare-lip.  “I'll go to Uncle
Harvey and--”

“Oh, yes,” I says, “I _would_.  Of _course_ I would.  I wouldn't lose no
time.”

“Well, why wouldn't you?”

“Just look at it a minute, and maybe you can see.  Hain't your uncles
obleegd to get along home to England as fast as they can?  And do you
reckon they'd be mean enough to go off and leave you to go all that
journey by yourselves?  _you_ know they'll wait for you.  So fur, so
good. Your uncle Harvey's a preacher, ain't he?  Very well, then; is a
_preacher_ going to deceive a steamboat clerk? is he going to deceive
a _ship clerk?_--so as to get them to let Miss Mary Jane go aboard?  Now
_you_ know he ain't.  What _will_ he do, then?  Why, he'll say, 'It's a
great pity, but my church matters has got to get along the best way they
can; for my niece has been exposed to the dreadful pluribus-unum mumps,
and so it's my bounden duty to set down here and wait the three months
it takes to show on her if she's got it.'  But never mind, if you think
it's best to tell your uncle Harvey--”

“Shucks, and stay fooling around here when we could all be having good
times in England whilst we was waiting to find out whether Mary Jane's
got it or not?  Why, you talk like a muggins.”

“Well, anyway, maybe you'd better tell some of the neighbors.”

“Listen at that, now.  You do beat all for natural stupidness.  Can't
you _see_ that _they'd_ go and tell?  Ther' ain't no way but just to not
tell anybody at _all_.”

“Well, maybe you're right--yes, I judge you _are_ right.”

“But I reckon we ought to tell Uncle Harvey she's gone out a while,
anyway, so he won't be uneasy about her?”

“Yes, Miss Mary Jane she wanted you to do that.  She says, 'Tell them to
give Uncle Harvey and William my love and a kiss, and say I've run over
the river to see Mr.'--Mr.--what _is_ the name of that rich family your
uncle Peter used to think so much of?--I mean the one that--”

“Why, you must mean the Apthorps, ain't it?”

“Of course; bother them kind of names, a body can't ever seem to
remember them, half the time, somehow.  Yes, she said, say she has run
over for to ask the Apthorps to be sure and come to the auction and buy
this house, because she allowed her uncle Peter would ruther they had
it than anybody else; and she's going to stick to them till they say
they'll come, and then, if she ain't too tired, she's coming home; and
if she is, she'll be home in the morning anyway.  She said, don't say
nothing about the Proctors, but only about the Apthorps--which 'll be
perfectly true, because she is going there to speak about their buying
the house; I know it, because she told me so herself.”

“All right,” they said, and cleared out to lay for their uncles, and
give them the love and the kisses, and tell them the message.

Everything was all right now.  The girls wouldn't say nothing because
they wanted to go to England; and the king and the duke would ruther
Mary Jane was off working for the auction than around in reach of
Doctor Robinson.  I felt very good; I judged I had done it pretty neat--I
reckoned Tom Sawyer couldn't a done it no neater himself.  Of course he
would a throwed more style into it, but I can't do that very handy, not
being brung up to it.

Well, they held the auction in the public square, along towards the end
of the afternoon, and it strung along, and strung along, and the old man
he was on hand and looking his level pisonest, up there longside of the
auctioneer, and chipping in a little Scripture now and then, or a little
goody-goody saying of some kind, and the duke he was around goo-gooing
for sympathy all he knowed how, and just spreading himself generly.

But by and by the thing dragged through, and everything was
sold--everything but a little old trifling lot in the graveyard.  So
they'd got to work that off--I never see such a girafft as the king was
for wanting to swallow _everything_.  Well, whilst they was at it a
steamboat landed, and in about two minutes up comes a crowd a-whooping
and yelling and laughing and carrying on, and singing out:

“_Here's_ your opposition line! here's your two sets o' heirs to old
Peter Wilks--and you pays your money and you takes your choice!”




CHAPTER XXIX.

THEY was fetching a very nice-looking old gentleman along, and a
nice-looking younger one, with his right arm in a sling.  And, my souls,
how the people yelled and laughed, and kept it up.  But I didn't see no
joke about it, and I judged it would strain the duke and the king some
to see any.  I reckoned they'd turn pale.  But no, nary a pale did
_they_ turn. The duke he never let on he suspicioned what was up, but
just went a goo-gooing around, happy and satisfied, like a jug that's
googling out buttermilk; and as for the king, he just gazed and gazed
down sorrowful on them new-comers like it give him the stomach-ache in
his very heart to think there could be such frauds and rascals in the
world.  Oh, he done it admirable.  Lots of the principal people
gethered around the king, to let him see they was on his side.  That old
gentleman that had just come looked all puzzled to death.  Pretty
soon he begun to speak, and I see straight off he pronounced _like_ an
Englishman--not the king's way, though the king's _was_ pretty good for
an imitation.  I can't give the old gent's words, nor I can't imitate
him; but he turned around to the crowd, and says, about like this:

“This is a surprise to me which I wasn't looking for; and I'll
acknowledge, candid and frank, I ain't very well fixed to meet it and
answer it; for my brother and me has had misfortunes; he's broke his
arm, and our baggage got put off at a town above here last night in the
night by a mistake.  I am Peter Wilks' brother Harvey, and this is his
brother William, which can't hear nor speak--and can't even make signs to
amount to much, now't he's only got one hand to work them with.  We are
who we say we are; and in a day or two, when I get the baggage, I can
prove it. But up till then I won't say nothing more, but go to the hotel
and wait.”

So him and the new dummy started off; and the king he laughs, and
blethers out:

“Broke his arm--_very_ likely, _ain't_ it?--and very convenient, too,
for a fraud that's got to make signs, and ain't learnt how.  Lost
their baggage! That's _mighty_ good!--and mighty ingenious--under the
_circumstances_!”

So he laughed again; and so did everybody else, except three or four,
or maybe half a dozen.  One of these was that doctor; another one was
a sharp-looking gentleman, with a carpet-bag of the old-fashioned kind
made out of carpet-stuff, that had just come off of the steamboat and
was talking to him in a low voice, and glancing towards the king now and
then and nodding their heads--it was Levi Bell, the lawyer that was gone
up to Louisville; and another one was a big rough husky that come along
and listened to all the old gentleman said, and was listening to the
king now. And when the king got done this husky up and says:

“Say, looky here; if you are Harvey Wilks, when'd you come to this
town?”

“The day before the funeral, friend,” says the king.

“But what time o' day?”

“In the evenin'--'bout an hour er two before sundown.”

“_How'd_ you come?”

“I come down on the Susan Powell from Cincinnati.”

“Well, then, how'd you come to be up at the Pint in the _mornin_'--in a
canoe?”

“I warn't up at the Pint in the mornin'.”

“It's a lie.”

Several of them jumped for him and begged him not to talk that way to an
old man and a preacher.

“Preacher be hanged, he's a fraud and a liar.  He was up at the Pint
that mornin'.  I live up there, don't I?  Well, I was up there, and
he was up there.  I see him there.  He come in a canoe, along with Tim
Collins and a boy.”

The doctor he up and says:

“Would you know the boy again if you was to see him, Hines?”

“I reckon I would, but I don't know.  Why, yonder he is, now.  I know
him perfectly easy.”

It was me he pointed at.  The doctor says:

“Neighbors, I don't know whether the new couple is frauds or not; but if
_these_ two ain't frauds, I am an idiot, that's all.  I think it's our
duty to see that they don't get away from here till we've looked into
this thing. Come along, Hines; come along, the rest of you.  We'll take
these fellows to the tavern and affront them with t'other couple, and I
reckon we'll find out _something_ before we get through.”

It was nuts for the crowd, though maybe not for the king's friends; so
we all started.  It was about sundown.  The doctor he led me along by
the hand, and was plenty kind enough, but he never let go my hand.

We all got in a big room in the hotel, and lit up some candles, and
fetched in the new couple.  First, the doctor says:

“I don't wish to be too hard on these two men, but I think they're
frauds, and they may have complices that we don't know nothing about.
 If they have, won't the complices get away with that bag of gold Peter
Wilks left?  It ain't unlikely.  If these men ain't frauds, they won't
object to sending for that money and letting us keep it till they prove
they're all right--ain't that so?”

Everybody agreed to that.  So I judged they had our gang in a pretty
tight place right at the outstart.  But the king he only looked
sorrowful, and says:

“Gentlemen, I wish the money was there, for I ain't got no disposition
to throw anything in the way of a fair, open, out-and-out investigation
o' this misable business; but, alas, the money ain't there; you k'n send
and see, if you want to.”

“Where is it, then?”

“Well, when my niece give it to me to keep for her I took and hid it
inside o' the straw tick o' my bed, not wishin' to bank it for the few
days we'd be here, and considerin' the bed a safe place, we not bein'
used to niggers, and suppos'n' 'em honest, like servants in England.
 The niggers stole it the very next mornin' after I had went down
stairs; and when I sold 'em I hadn't missed the money yit, so they got
clean away with it.  My servant here k'n tell you 'bout it, gentlemen.”

The doctor and several said “Shucks!” and I see nobody didn't altogether
believe him.  One man asked me if I see the niggers steal it.  I said
no, but I see them sneaking out of the room and hustling away, and I
never thought nothing, only I reckoned they was afraid they had waked up
my master and was trying to get away before he made trouble with them.
 That was all they asked me.  Then the doctor whirls on me and says:

“Are _you_ English, too?”

I says yes; and him and some others laughed, and said, “Stuff!”

Well, then they sailed in on the general investigation, and there we had
it, up and down, hour in, hour out, and nobody never said a word about
supper, nor ever seemed to think about it--and so they kept it up, and
kept it up; and it _was_ the worst mixed-up thing you ever see.  They
made the king tell his yarn, and they made the old gentleman tell his'n;
and anybody but a lot of prejudiced chuckleheads would a _seen_ that the
old gentleman was spinning truth and t'other one lies.  And by and by
they had me up to tell what I knowed.  The king he give me a left-handed
look out of the corner of his eye, and so I knowed enough to talk on the
right side.  I begun to tell about Sheffield, and how we lived there,
and all about the English Wilkses, and so on; but I didn't get pretty
fur till the doctor begun to laugh; and Levi Bell, the lawyer, says:

“Set down, my boy; I wouldn't strain myself if I was you.  I reckon
you ain't used to lying, it don't seem to come handy; what you want is
practice.  You do it pretty awkward.”

I didn't care nothing for the compliment, but I was glad to be let off,
anyway.

The doctor he started to say something, and turns and says:

“If you'd been in town at first, Levi Bell--” The king broke in and
reached out his hand, and says:

“Why, is this my poor dead brother's old friend that he's wrote so often
about?”

The lawyer and him shook hands, and the lawyer smiled and looked
pleased, and they talked right along awhile, and then got to one side
and talked low; and at last the lawyer speaks up and says:

“That 'll fix it.  I'll take the order and send it, along with your
brother's, and then they'll know it's all right.”

So they got some paper and a pen, and the king he set down and twisted
his head to one side, and chawed his tongue, and scrawled off something;
and then they give the pen to the duke--and then for the first time the
duke looked sick.  But he took the pen and wrote.  So then the lawyer
turns to the new old gentleman and says:

“You and your brother please write a line or two and sign your names.”

The old gentleman wrote, but nobody couldn't read it.  The lawyer looked
powerful astonished, and says:

“Well, it beats _me_”--and snaked a lot of old letters out of his pocket,
and examined them, and then examined the old man's writing, and then
_them_ again; and then says:  “These old letters is from Harvey Wilks;
and here's _these_ two handwritings, and anybody can see they didn't
write them” (the king and the duke looked sold and foolish, I tell
you, to see how the lawyer had took them in), “and here's _this_ old
gentleman's hand writing, and anybody can tell, easy enough, _he_ didn't
write them--fact is, the scratches he makes ain't properly _writing_ at
all.  Now, here's some letters from--”

The new old gentleman says:

“If you please, let me explain.  Nobody can read my hand but my brother
there--so he copies for me.  It's _his_ hand you've got there, not mine.”

“_Well_!” says the lawyer, “this _is_ a state of things.  I've got some
of William's letters, too; so if you'll get him to write a line or so we
can com--”

“He _can't_ write with his left hand,” says the old gentleman.  “If he
could use his right hand, you would see that he wrote his own letters
and mine too.  Look at both, please--they're by the same hand.”

The lawyer done it, and says:

“I believe it's so--and if it ain't so, there's a heap stronger
resemblance than I'd noticed before, anyway.  Well, well, well!  I
thought we was right on the track of a solution, but it's gone to grass,
partly.  But anyway, one thing is proved--_these_ two ain't either of 'em
Wilkses”--and he wagged his head towards the king and the duke.

Well, what do you think?  That muleheaded old fool wouldn't give in
_then_! Indeed he wouldn't.  Said it warn't no fair test.  Said his
brother William was the cussedest joker in the world, and hadn't tried
to write--_he_ see William was going to play one of his jokes the minute
he put the pen to paper.  And so he warmed up and went warbling and
warbling right along till he was actuly beginning to believe what he was
saying _himself_; but pretty soon the new gentleman broke in, and says:

“I've thought of something.  Is there anybody here that helped to lay
out my br--helped to lay out the late Peter Wilks for burying?”

“Yes,” says somebody, “me and Ab Turner done it.  We're both here.”

Then the old man turns towards the king, and says:

“Perhaps this gentleman can tell me what was tattooed on his breast?”

Blamed if the king didn't have to brace up mighty quick, or he'd a
squshed down like a bluff bank that the river has cut under, it took
him so sudden; and, mind you, it was a thing that was calculated to make
most _anybody_ sqush to get fetched such a solid one as that without any
notice, because how was _he_ going to know what was tattooed on the man?
 He whitened a little; he couldn't help it; and it was mighty still in
there, and everybody bending a little forwards and gazing at him.  Says
I to myself, _now_ he'll throw up the sponge--there ain't no more use.
 Well, did he?  A body can't hardly believe it, but he didn't.  I reckon
he thought he'd keep the thing up till he tired them people out, so
they'd thin out, and him and the duke could break loose and get away.
 Anyway, he set there, and pretty soon he begun to smile, and says:

“Mf!  It's a _very_ tough question, _ain't_ it!  _yes_, sir, I k'n
tell you what's tattooed on his breast.  It's jest a small, thin, blue
arrow--that's what it is; and if you don't look clost, you can't see it.
 _now_ what do you say--hey?”

Well, I never see anything like that old blister for clean out-and-out
cheek.

The new old gentleman turns brisk towards Ab Turner and his pard, and
his eye lights up like he judged he'd got the king _this_ time, and
says:

“There--you've heard what he said!  Was there any such mark on Peter
Wilks' breast?”

Both of them spoke up and says:

“We didn't see no such mark.”

“Good!” says the old gentleman.  “Now, what you _did_ see on his breast
was a small dim P, and a B (which is an initial he dropped when he was
young), and a W, with dashes between them, so:  P--B--W”--and he marked
them that way on a piece of paper.  “Come, ain't that what you saw?”

Both of them spoke up again, and says:

“No, we _didn't_.  We never seen any marks at all.”

Well, everybody _was_ in a state of mind now, and they sings out:

“The whole _bilin_' of 'm 's frauds!  Le's duck 'em! le's drown 'em!
le's ride 'em on a rail!” and everybody was whooping at once, and there
was a rattling powwow.  But the lawyer he jumps on the table and yells,
and says:

“Gentlemen--gentle_men!_  Hear me just a word--just a _single_ word--if you
_please_!  There's one way yet--let's go and dig up the corpse and look.”

That took them.

“Hooray!” they all shouted, and was starting right off; but the lawyer
and the doctor sung out:

“Hold on, hold on!  Collar all these four men and the boy, and fetch
_them_ along, too!”

“We'll do it!” they all shouted; “and if we don't find them marks we'll
lynch the whole gang!”

I _was_ scared, now, I tell you.  But there warn't no getting away, you
know. They gripped us all, and marched us right along, straight for the
graveyard, which was a mile and a half down the river, and the whole
town at our heels, for we made noise enough, and it was only nine in the
evening.

As we went by our house I wished I hadn't sent Mary Jane out of town;
because now if I could tip her the wink she'd light out and save me, and
blow on our dead-beats.

Well, we swarmed along down the river road, just carrying on like
wildcats; and to make it more scary the sky was darking up, and the
lightning beginning to wink and flitter, and the wind to shiver amongst
the leaves. This was the most awful trouble and most dangersome I ever
was in; and I was kinder stunned; everything was going so different from
what I had allowed for; stead of being fixed so I could take my own time
if I wanted to, and see all the fun, and have Mary Jane at my back to
save me and set me free when the close-fit come, here was nothing in the
world betwixt me and sudden death but just them tattoo-marks.  If they
didn't find them--

I couldn't bear to think about it; and yet, somehow, I couldn't think
about nothing else.  It got darker and darker, and it was a beautiful
time to give the crowd the slip; but that big husky had me by the
wrist--Hines--and a body might as well try to give Goliar the slip.  He
dragged me right along, he was so excited, and I had to run to keep up.

When they got there they swarmed into the graveyard and washed over it
like an overflow.  And when they got to the grave they found they had
about a hundred times as many shovels as they wanted, but nobody hadn't
thought to fetch a lantern.  But they sailed into digging anyway by the
flicker of the lightning, and sent a man to the nearest house, a half a
mile off, to borrow one.

So they dug and dug like everything; and it got awful dark, and the rain
started, and the wind swished and swushed along, and the lightning come
brisker and brisker, and the thunder boomed; but them people never took
no notice of it, they was so full of this business; and one minute
you could see everything and every face in that big crowd, and the
shovelfuls of dirt sailing up out of the grave, and the next second the
dark wiped it all out, and you couldn't see nothing at all.

At last they got out the coffin and begun to unscrew the lid, and then
such another crowding and shouldering and shoving as there was, to
scrouge in and get a sight, you never see; and in the dark, that way, it
was awful.  Hines he hurt my wrist dreadful pulling and tugging so,
and I reckon he clean forgot I was in the world, he was so excited and
panting.

All of a sudden the lightning let go a perfect sluice of white glare,
and somebody sings out:

“By the living jingo, here's the bag of gold on his breast!”

Hines let out a whoop, like everybody else, and dropped my wrist and
give a big surge to bust his way in and get a look, and the way I lit
out and shinned for the road in the dark there ain't nobody can tell.

I had the road all to myself, and I fairly flew--leastways, I had it all
to myself except the solid dark, and the now-and-then glares, and the
buzzing of the rain, and the thrashing of the wind, and the splitting of
the thunder; and sure as you are born I did clip it along!

When I struck the town I see there warn't nobody out in the storm, so
I never hunted for no back streets, but humped it straight through the
main one; and when I begun to get towards our house I aimed my eye and
set it. No light there; the house all dark--which made me feel sorry and
disappointed, I didn't know why.  But at last, just as I was sailing by,
_flash_ comes the light in Mary Jane's window! and my heart swelled up
sudden, like to bust; and the same second the house and all was behind
me in the dark, and wasn't ever going to be before me no more in this
world. She _was_ the best girl I ever see, and had the most sand.

The minute I was far enough above the town to see I could make the
towhead, I begun to look sharp for a boat to borrow, and the first
time the lightning showed me one that wasn't chained I snatched it and
shoved. It was a canoe, and warn't fastened with nothing but a rope.
 The towhead was a rattling big distance off, away out there in the
middle of the river, but I didn't lose no time; and when I struck the
raft at last I was so fagged I would a just laid down to blow and gasp
if I could afforded it.  But I didn't.  As I sprung aboard I sung out:

“Out with you, Jim, and set her loose!  Glory be to goodness, we're shut
of them!”

Jim lit out, and was a-coming for me with both arms spread, he was so
full of joy; but when I glimpsed him in the lightning my heart shot up
in my mouth and I went overboard backwards; for I forgot he was old King
Lear and a drownded A-rab all in one, and it most scared the livers and
lights out of me.  But Jim fished me out, and was going to hug me and
bless me, and so on, he was so glad I was back and we was shut of the
king and the duke, but I says:

“Not now; have it for breakfast, have it for breakfast!  Cut loose and
let her slide!”

So in two seconds away we went a-sliding down the river, and it _did_
seem so good to be free again and all by ourselves on the big river, and
nobody to bother us.  I had to skip around a bit, and jump up and crack
my heels a few times--I couldn't help it; but about the third crack
I noticed a sound that I knowed mighty well, and held my breath and
listened and waited; and sure enough, when the next flash busted out
over the water, here they come!--and just a-laying to their oars and
making their skiff hum!  It was the king and the duke.

So I wilted right down on to the planks then, and give up; and it was
all I could do to keep from crying.




CHAPTER XXX.

WHEN they got aboard the king went for me, and shook me by the collar,
and says:

“Tryin' to give us the slip, was ye, you pup!  Tired of our company,
hey?”

I says:

“No, your majesty, we warn't--_please_ don't, your majesty!”

“Quick, then, and tell us what _was_ your idea, or I'll shake the
insides out o' you!”

“Honest, I'll tell you everything just as it happened, your majesty.
 The man that had a-holt of me was very good to me, and kept saying he
had a boy about as big as me that died last year, and he was sorry
to see a boy in such a dangerous fix; and when they was all took by
surprise by finding the gold, and made a rush for the coffin, he lets go
of me and whispers, 'Heel it now, or they'll hang ye, sure!' and I lit
out.  It didn't seem no good for _me_ to stay--I couldn't do nothing,
and I didn't want to be hung if I could get away.  So I never stopped
running till I found the canoe; and when I got here I told Jim to hurry,
or they'd catch me and hang me yet, and said I was afeard you and the
duke wasn't alive now, and I was awful sorry, and so was Jim, and was
awful glad when we see you coming; you may ask Jim if I didn't.”

Jim said it was so; and the king told him to shut up, and said, “Oh,
yes, it's _mighty_ likely!” and shook me up again, and said he reckoned
he'd drownd me.  But the duke says:

“Leggo the boy, you old idiot!  Would _you_ a done any different?  Did
you inquire around for _him_ when you got loose?  I don't remember it.”

So the king let go of me, and begun to cuss that town and everybody in
it. But the duke says:

“You better a blame' sight give _yourself_ a good cussing, for you're
the one that's entitled to it most.  You hain't done a thing from the
start that had any sense in it, except coming out so cool and cheeky
with that imaginary blue-arrow mark.  That _was_ bright--it was right
down bully; and it was the thing that saved us.  For if it hadn't been
for that they'd a jailed us till them Englishmen's baggage come--and
then--the penitentiary, you bet! But that trick took 'em to the
graveyard, and the gold done us a still bigger kindness; for if the
excited fools hadn't let go all holts and made that rush to get a
look we'd a slept in our cravats to-night--cravats warranted to _wear_,
too--longer than _we'd_ need 'em.”

They was still a minute--thinking; then the king says, kind of
absent-minded like:

“Mf!  And we reckoned the _niggers_ stole it!”

That made me squirm!

“Yes,” says the duke, kinder slow and deliberate and sarcastic, “_we_
did.”

After about a half a minute the king drawls out:

“Leastways, I did.”

The duke says, the same way:

“On the contrary, I did.”

The king kind of ruffles up, and says:

“Looky here, Bilgewater, what'r you referrin' to?”

The duke says, pretty brisk:

“When it comes to that, maybe you'll let me ask, what was _you_
referring to?”

“Shucks!” says the king, very sarcastic; “but I don't know--maybe you was
asleep, and didn't know what you was about.”

The duke bristles up now, and says:

“Oh, let _up_ on this cussed nonsense; do you take me for a blame' fool?
Don't you reckon I know who hid that money in that coffin?”

“_Yes_, sir!  I know you _do_ know, because you done it yourself!”

“It's a lie!”--and the duke went for him.  The king sings out:

“Take y'r hands off!--leggo my throat!--I take it all back!”

The duke says:

“Well, you just own up, first, that you _did_ hide that money there,
intending to give me the slip one of these days, and come back and dig
it up, and have it all to yourself.”

“Wait jest a minute, duke--answer me this one question, honest and fair;
if you didn't put the money there, say it, and I'll b'lieve you, and
take back everything I said.”

“You old scoundrel, I didn't, and you know I didn't.  There, now!”

“Well, then, I b'lieve you.  But answer me only jest this one more--now
_don't_ git mad; didn't you have it in your mind to hook the money and
hide it?”

The duke never said nothing for a little bit; then he says:

“Well, I don't care if I _did_, I didn't _do_ it, anyway.  But you not
only had it in mind to do it, but you _done_ it.”

“I wisht I never die if I done it, duke, and that's honest.  I won't say
I warn't goin' to do it, because I _was_; but you--I mean somebody--got in
ahead o' me.”

“It's a lie!  You done it, and you got to _say_ you done it, or--”

The king began to gurgle, and then he gasps out:

“'Nough!--I _own up!_”

I was very glad to hear him say that; it made me feel much more easier
than what I was feeling before.  So the duke took his hands off and
says:

“If you ever deny it again I'll drown you.  It's _well_ for you to set
there and blubber like a baby--it's fitten for you, after the way
you've acted. I never see such an old ostrich for wanting to gobble
everything--and I a-trusting you all the time, like you was my own
father.  You ought to been ashamed of yourself to stand by and hear it
saddled on to a lot of poor niggers, and you never say a word for 'em.
 It makes me feel ridiculous to think I was soft enough to _believe_
that rubbage.  Cuss you, I can see now why you was so anxious to make
up the deffisit--you wanted to get what money I'd got out of the Nonesuch
and one thing or another, and scoop it _all_!”

The king says, timid, and still a-snuffling:

“Why, duke, it was you that said make up the deffisit; it warn't me.”

“Dry up!  I don't want to hear no more out of you!” says the duke.  “And
_now_ you see what you GOT by it.  They've got all their own money back,
and all of _ourn_ but a shekel or two _besides_.  G'long to bed, and
don't you deffersit _me_ no more deffersits, long 's _you_ live!”

So the king sneaked into the wigwam and took to his bottle for comfort,
and before long the duke tackled HIS bottle; and so in about a half an
hour they was as thick as thieves again, and the tighter they got the
lovinger they got, and went off a-snoring in each other's arms.  They
both got powerful mellow, but I noticed the king didn't get mellow
enough to forget to remember to not deny about hiding the money-bag
again.  That made me feel easy and satisfied.  Of course when they got
to snoring we had a long gabble, and I told Jim everything.




CHAPTER XXXI.

WE dasn't stop again at any town for days and days; kept right along
down the river.  We was down south in the warm weather now, and a mighty
long ways from home.  We begun to come to trees with Spanish moss on
them, hanging down from the limbs like long, gray beards.  It was the
first I ever see it growing, and it made the woods look solemn and
dismal.  So now the frauds reckoned they was out of danger, and they
begun to work the villages again.

First they done a lecture on temperance; but they didn't make enough
for them both to get drunk on.  Then in another village they started
a dancing-school; but they didn't know no more how to dance than a
kangaroo does; so the first prance they made the general public jumped
in and pranced them out of town.  Another time they tried to go at
yellocution; but they didn't yellocute long till the audience got up and
give them a solid good cussing, and made them skip out.  They tackled
missionarying, and mesmerizing, and doctoring, and telling fortunes, and
a little of everything; but they couldn't seem to have no luck.  So at
last they got just about dead broke, and laid around the raft as she
floated along, thinking and thinking, and never saying nothing, by the
half a day at a time, and dreadful blue and desperate.

And at last they took a change and begun to lay their heads together in
the wigwam and talk low and confidential two or three hours at a time.
Jim and me got uneasy.  We didn't like the look of it.  We judged they
was studying up some kind of worse deviltry than ever.  We turned it
over and over, and at last we made up our minds they was going to break
into somebody's house or store, or was going into the counterfeit-money
business, or something. So then we was pretty scared, and made up an
agreement that we wouldn't have nothing in the world to do with such
actions, and if we ever got the least show we would give them the cold
shake and clear out and leave them behind. Well, early one morning we
hid the raft in a good, safe place about two mile below a little bit of
a shabby village named Pikesville, and the king he went ashore and told
us all to stay hid whilst he went up to town and smelt around to see
if anybody had got any wind of the Royal Nonesuch there yet. (“House to
rob, you _mean_,” says I to myself; “and when you get through robbing it
you'll come back here and wonder what has become of me and Jim and the
raft--and you'll have to take it out in wondering.”) And he said if he
warn't back by midday the duke and me would know it was all right, and
we was to come along.

So we stayed where we was.  The duke he fretted and sweated around, and
was in a mighty sour way.  He scolded us for everything, and we couldn't
seem to do nothing right; he found fault with every little thing.
Something was a-brewing, sure.  I was good and glad when midday come
and no king; we could have a change, anyway--and maybe a chance for _the_
change on top of it.  So me and the duke went up to the village, and
hunted around there for the king, and by and by we found him in the
back room of a little low doggery, very tight, and a lot of loafers
bullyragging him for sport, and he a-cussing and a-threatening with all
his might, and so tight he couldn't walk, and couldn't do nothing to
them.  The duke he begun to abuse him for an old fool, and the king
begun to sass back, and the minute they was fairly at it I lit out and
shook the reefs out of my hind legs, and spun down the river road like
a deer, for I see our chance; and I made up my mind that it would be a
long day before they ever see me and Jim again.  I got down there all
out of breath but loaded up with joy, and sung out:

“Set her loose, Jim! we're all right now!”

But there warn't no answer, and nobody come out of the wigwam.  Jim was
gone!  I set up a shout--and then another--and then another one; and run
this way and that in the woods, whooping and screeching; but it warn't
no use--old Jim was gone.  Then I set down and cried; I couldn't help
it. But I couldn't set still long.  Pretty soon I went out on the road,
trying to think what I better do, and I run across a boy walking, and
asked him if he'd seen a strange nigger dressed so and so, and he says:

“Yes.”

“Whereabouts?” says I.

“Down to Silas Phelps' place, two mile below here.  He's a runaway
nigger, and they've got him.  Was you looking for him?”

“You bet I ain't!  I run across him in the woods about an hour or two
ago, and he said if I hollered he'd cut my livers out--and told me to lay
down and stay where I was; and I done it.  Been there ever since; afeard
to come out.”

“Well,” he says, “you needn't be afeard no more, becuz they've got him.
He run off f'm down South, som'ers.”

“It's a good job they got him.”

“Well, I _reckon_!  There's two hunderd dollars reward on him.  It's
like picking up money out'n the road.”

“Yes, it is--and I could a had it if I'd been big enough; I see him
_first_. Who nailed him?”

“It was an old fellow--a stranger--and he sold out his chance in him for
forty dollars, becuz he's got to go up the river and can't wait.  Think
o' that, now!  You bet _I'd_ wait, if it was seven year.”

“That's me, every time,” says I.  “But maybe his chance ain't worth
no more than that, if he'll sell it so cheap.  Maybe there's something
ain't straight about it.”

“But it _is_, though--straight as a string.  I see the handbill myself.
 It tells all about him, to a dot--paints him like a picture, and tells
the plantation he's frum, below Newr_leans_.  No-sirree-_bob_, they
ain't no trouble 'bout _that_ speculation, you bet you.  Say, gimme a
chaw tobacker, won't ye?”

I didn't have none, so he left.  I went to the raft, and set down in the
wigwam to think.  But I couldn't come to nothing.  I thought till I wore
my head sore, but I couldn't see no way out of the trouble.  After all
this long journey, and after all we'd done for them scoundrels, here it
was all come to nothing, everything all busted up and ruined, because
they could have the heart to serve Jim such a trick as that, and make
him a slave again all his life, and amongst strangers, too, for forty
dirty dollars.

Once I said to myself it would be a thousand times better for Jim to
be a slave at home where his family was, as long as he'd _got_ to be a
slave, and so I'd better write a letter to Tom Sawyer and tell him to
tell Miss Watson where he was.  But I soon give up that notion for two
things: she'd be mad and disgusted at his rascality and ungratefulness
for leaving her, and so she'd sell him straight down the river again;
and if she didn't, everybody naturally despises an ungrateful nigger,
and they'd make Jim feel it all the time, and so he'd feel ornery and
disgraced. And then think of _me_!  It would get all around that Huck
Finn helped a nigger to get his freedom; and if I was ever to see
anybody from that town again I'd be ready to get down and lick his boots
for shame.  That's just the way:  a person does a low-down thing, and
then he don't want to take no consequences of it. Thinks as long as he
can hide it, it ain't no disgrace.  That was my fix exactly. The more I
studied about this the more my conscience went to grinding me, and the
more wicked and low-down and ornery I got to feeling. And at last, when
it hit me all of a sudden that here was the plain hand of Providence
slapping me in the face and letting me know my wickedness was being
watched all the time from up there in heaven, whilst I was stealing a
poor old woman's nigger that hadn't ever done me no harm, and now was
showing me there's One that's always on the lookout, and ain't a-going
to allow no such miserable doings to go only just so fur and no further,
I most dropped in my tracks I was so scared.  Well, I tried the best I
could to kinder soften it up somehow for myself by saying I was brung
up wicked, and so I warn't so much to blame; but something inside of me
kept saying, “There was the Sunday-school, you could a gone to it; and
if you'd a done it they'd a learnt you there that people that acts as
I'd been acting about that nigger goes to everlasting fire.”

It made me shiver.  And I about made up my mind to pray, and see if I
couldn't try to quit being the kind of a boy I was and be better.  So
I kneeled down.  But the words wouldn't come.  Why wouldn't they?  It
warn't no use to try and hide it from Him.  Nor from _me_, neither.  I
knowed very well why they wouldn't come.  It was because my heart warn't
right; it was because I warn't square; it was because I was playing
double.  I was letting _on_ to give up sin, but away inside of me I was
holding on to the biggest one of all.  I was trying to make my mouth
_say_ I would do the right thing and the clean thing, and go and write
to that nigger's owner and tell where he was; but deep down in me I
knowed it was a lie, and He knowed it.  You can't pray a lie--I found
that out.

So I was full of trouble, full as I could be; and didn't know what to
do. At last I had an idea; and I says, I'll go and write the letter--and
then see if I can pray.  Why, it was astonishing, the way I felt as
light as a feather right straight off, and my troubles all gone.  So I
got a piece of paper and a pencil, all glad and excited, and set down
and wrote:

Miss Watson, your runaway nigger Jim is down here two mile below
Pikesville, and Mr. Phelps has got him and he will give him up for the
reward if you send.

_Huck Finn._

I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever
felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray now.  But I didn't do it
straight off, but laid the paper down and set there thinking--thinking
how good it was all this happened so, and how near I come to being lost
and going to hell.  And went on thinking.  And got to thinking over our
trip down the river; and I see Jim before me all the time:  in the day
and in the night-time, sometimes moonlight, sometimes storms, and we
a-floating along, talking and singing and laughing.  But somehow I
couldn't seem to strike no places to harden me against him, but only the
other kind.  I'd see him standing my watch on top of his'n, 'stead of
calling me, so I could go on sleeping; and see him how glad he was when
I come back out of the fog; and when I come to him again in the swamp,
up there where the feud was; and such-like times; and would always call
me honey, and pet me and do everything he could think of for me, and how
good he always was; and at last I struck the time I saved him by telling
the men we had small-pox aboard, and he was so grateful, and said I was
the best friend old Jim ever had in the world, and the _only_ one he's
got now; and then I happened to look around and see that paper.

It was a close place.  I took it up, and held it in my hand.  I was
a-trembling, because I'd got to decide, forever, betwixt two things, and
I knowed it.  I studied a minute, sort of holding my breath, and then
says to myself:

“All right, then, I'll _go_ to hell”--and tore it up.

It was awful thoughts and awful words, but they was said.  And I let
them stay said; and never thought no more about reforming.  I shoved the
whole thing out of my head, and said I would take up wickedness again,
which was in my line, being brung up to it, and the other warn't.  And
for a starter I would go to work and steal Jim out of slavery again;
and if I could think up anything worse, I would do that, too; because as
long as I was in, and in for good, I might as well go the whole hog.

Then I set to thinking over how to get at it, and turned over some
considerable many ways in my mind; and at last fixed up a plan that
suited me.  So then I took the bearings of a woody island that was down
the river a piece, and as soon as it was fairly dark I crept out with my
raft and went for it, and hid it there, and then turned in.  I slept the
night through, and got up before it was light, and had my breakfast,
and put on my store clothes, and tied up some others and one thing or
another in a bundle, and took the canoe and cleared for shore.  I landed
below where I judged was Phelps's place, and hid my bundle in the woods,
and then filled up the canoe with water, and loaded rocks into her and
sunk her where I could find her again when I wanted her, about a quarter
of a mile below a little steam sawmill that was on the bank.

Then I struck up the road, and when I passed the mill I see a sign on
it, “Phelps's Sawmill,” and when I come to the farm-houses, two or
three hundred yards further along, I kept my eyes peeled, but didn't
see nobody around, though it was good daylight now.  But I didn't mind,
because I didn't want to see nobody just yet--I only wanted to get the
lay of the land. According to my plan, I was going to turn up there from
the village, not from below.  So I just took a look, and shoved along,
straight for town. Well, the very first man I see when I got there was
the duke.  He was sticking up a bill for the Royal Nonesuch--three-night
performance--like that other time.  They had the cheek, them frauds!  I
was right on him before I could shirk.  He looked astonished, and says:

“Hel-_lo_!  Where'd _you_ come from?”  Then he says, kind of glad and
eager, “Where's the raft?--got her in a good place?”

I says:

“Why, that's just what I was going to ask your grace.”

Then he didn't look so joyful, and says:

“What was your idea for asking _me_?” he says.

“Well,” I says, “when I see the king in that doggery yesterday I says
to myself, we can't get him home for hours, till he's soberer; so I went
a-loafing around town to put in the time and wait.  A man up and offered
me ten cents to help him pull a skiff over the river and back to fetch
a sheep, and so I went along; but when we was dragging him to the boat,
and the man left me a-holt of the rope and went behind him to shove him
along, he was too strong for me and jerked loose and run, and we after
him.  We didn't have no dog, and so we had to chase him all over the
country till we tired him out.  We never got him till dark; then we
fetched him over, and I started down for the raft.  When I got there and
see it was gone, I says to myself, 'They've got into trouble and had to
leave; and they've took my nigger, which is the only nigger I've got in
the world, and now I'm in a strange country, and ain't got no property
no more, nor nothing, and no way to make my living;' so I set down and
cried.  I slept in the woods all night.  But what _did_ become of the
raft, then?--and Jim--poor Jim!”

“Blamed if I know--that is, what's become of the raft.  That old fool had
made a trade and got forty dollars, and when we found him in the doggery
the loafers had matched half-dollars with him and got every cent but
what he'd spent for whisky; and when I got him home late last night and
found the raft gone, we said, 'That little rascal has stole our raft and
shook us, and run off down the river.'”

“I wouldn't shake my _nigger_, would I?--the only nigger I had in the
world, and the only property.”

“We never thought of that.  Fact is, I reckon we'd come to consider him
_our_ nigger; yes, we did consider him so--goodness knows we had trouble
enough for him.  So when we see the raft was gone and we flat broke,
there warn't anything for it but to try the Royal Nonesuch another
shake. And I've pegged along ever since, dry as a powder-horn.  Where's
that ten cents? Give it here.”

I had considerable money, so I give him ten cents, but begged him to
spend it for something to eat, and give me some, because it was all the
money I had, and I hadn't had nothing to eat since yesterday.  He never
said nothing.  The next minute he whirls on me and says:

“Do you reckon that nigger would blow on us?  We'd skin him if he done
that!”

“How can he blow?  Hain't he run off?”

“No!  That old fool sold him, and never divided with me, and the money's
gone.”

“_Sold_ him?”  I says, and begun to cry; “why, he was _my_ nigger, and
that was my money.  Where is he?--I want my nigger.”

“Well, you can't _get_ your nigger, that's all--so dry up your
blubbering. Looky here--do you think _you'd_ venture to blow on us?
 Blamed if I think I'd trust you.  Why, if you _was_ to blow on us--”

He stopped, but I never see the duke look so ugly out of his eyes
before. I went on a-whimpering, and says:

“I don't want to blow on nobody; and I ain't got no time to blow, nohow.
I got to turn out and find my nigger.”

He looked kinder bothered, and stood there with his bills fluttering on
his arm, thinking, and wrinkling up his forehead.  At last he says:

“I'll tell you something.  We got to be here three days.  If you'll
promise you won't blow, and won't let the nigger blow, I'll tell you
where to find him.”

So I promised, and he says:

“A farmer by the name of Silas Ph--” and then he stopped.  You see, he
started to tell me the truth; but when he stopped that way, and begun to
study and think again, I reckoned he was changing his mind.  And so he
was. He wouldn't trust me; he wanted to make sure of having me out of
the way the whole three days.  So pretty soon he says:

“The man that bought him is named Abram Foster--Abram G. Foster--and he
lives forty mile back here in the country, on the road to Lafayette.”

“All right,” I says, “I can walk it in three days.  And I'll start this
very afternoon.”

“No you wont, you'll start _now_; and don't you lose any time about it,
neither, nor do any gabbling by the way.  Just keep a tight tongue in
your head and move right along, and then you won't get into trouble with
_us_, d'ye hear?”

That was the order I wanted, and that was the one I played for.  I
wanted to be left free to work my plans.

“So clear out,” he says; “and you can tell Mr. Foster whatever you want
to. Maybe you can get him to believe that Jim _is_ your nigger--some
idiots don't require documents--leastways I've heard there's such down
South here.  And when you tell him the handbill and the reward's bogus,
maybe he'll believe you when you explain to him what the idea was for
getting 'em out.  Go 'long now, and tell him anything you want to; but
mind you don't work your jaw any _between_ here and there.”

So I left, and struck for the back country.  I didn't look around, but I
kinder felt like he was watching me.  But I knowed I could tire him out
at that.  I went straight out in the country as much as a mile before
I stopped; then I doubled back through the woods towards Phelps'.  I
reckoned I better start in on my plan straight off without fooling
around, because I wanted to stop Jim's mouth till these fellows could
get away.  I didn't want no trouble with their kind.  I'd seen all I
wanted to of them, and wanted to get entirely shut of them.




CHAPTER XXXII.

WHEN I got there it was all still and Sunday-like, and hot and sunshiny;
the hands was gone to the fields; and there was them kind of faint
dronings of bugs and flies in the air that makes it seem so lonesome and
like everybody's dead and gone; and if a breeze fans along and quivers
the leaves it makes you feel mournful, because you feel like it's
spirits whispering--spirits that's been dead ever so many years--and you
always think they're talking about _you_.  As a general thing it makes a
body wish _he_ was dead, too, and done with it all.

Phelps' was one of these little one-horse cotton plantations, and they
all look alike.  A rail fence round a two-acre yard; a stile made out
of logs sawed off and up-ended in steps, like barrels of a different
length, to climb over the fence with, and for the women to stand on when
they are going to jump on to a horse; some sickly grass-patches in the
big yard, but mostly it was bare and smooth, like an old hat with the
nap rubbed off; big double log-house for the white folks--hewed logs,
with the chinks stopped up with mud or mortar, and these mud-stripes
been whitewashed some time or another; round-log kitchen, with a big
broad, open but roofed passage joining it to the house; log smoke-house
back of the kitchen; three little log nigger-cabins in a row t'other
side the smoke-house; one little hut all by itself away down against
the back fence, and some outbuildings down a piece the other side;
ash-hopper and big kettle to bile soap in by the little hut; bench by
the kitchen door, with bucket of water and a gourd; hound asleep there
in the sun; more hounds asleep round about; about three shade trees away
off in a corner; some currant bushes and gooseberry bushes in one place
by the fence; outside of the fence a garden and a watermelon patch; then
the cotton fields begins, and after the fields the woods.

I went around and clumb over the back stile by the ash-hopper, and
started for the kitchen.  When I got a little ways I heard the dim hum
of a spinning-wheel wailing along up and sinking along down again;
and then I knowed for certain I wished I was dead--for that _is_ the
lonesomest sound in the whole world.

I went right along, not fixing up any particular plan, but just trusting
to Providence to put the right words in my mouth when the time come; for
I'd noticed that Providence always did put the right words in my mouth
if I left it alone.

When I got half-way, first one hound and then another got up and went
for me, and of course I stopped and faced them, and kept still.  And
such another powwow as they made!  In a quarter of a minute I was a kind
of a hub of a wheel, as you may say--spokes made out of dogs--circle of
fifteen of them packed together around me, with their necks and noses
stretched up towards me, a-barking and howling; and more a-coming; you
could see them sailing over fences and around corners from everywheres.

A nigger woman come tearing out of the kitchen with a rolling-pin in her
hand, singing out, “Begone _you_ Tige! you Spot! begone sah!” and she
fetched first one and then another of them a clip and sent them howling,
and then the rest followed; and the next second half of them come back,
wagging their tails around me, and making friends with me.  There ain't
no harm in a hound, nohow.

And behind the woman comes a little nigger girl and two little nigger
boys without anything on but tow-linen shirts, and they hung on to their
mother's gown, and peeped out from behind her at me, bashful, the way
they always do.  And here comes the white woman running from the house,
about forty-five or fifty year old, bareheaded, and her spinning-stick
in her hand; and behind her comes her little white children, acting the
same way the little niggers was doing.  She was smiling all over so she
could hardly stand--and says:

“It's _you_, at last!--_ain't_ it?”

I out with a “Yes'm” before I thought.

She grabbed me and hugged me tight; and then gripped me by both hands
and shook and shook; and the tears come in her eyes, and run down over;
and she couldn't seem to hug and shake enough, and kept saying, “You
don't look as much like your mother as I reckoned you would; but law
sakes, I don't care for that, I'm so glad to see you!  Dear, dear, it
does seem like I could eat you up!  Children, it's your cousin Tom!--tell
him howdy.”

But they ducked their heads, and put their fingers in their mouths, and
hid behind her.  So she run on:

“Lize, hurry up and get him a hot breakfast right away--or did you get
your breakfast on the boat?”

I said I had got it on the boat.  So then she started for the house,
leading me by the hand, and the children tagging after.  When we got
there she set me down in a split-bottomed chair, and set herself down on
a little low stool in front of me, holding both of my hands, and says:

“Now I can have a _good_ look at you; and, laws-a-me, I've been hungry
for it a many and a many a time, all these long years, and it's come
at last! We been expecting you a couple of days and more.  What kep'
you?--boat get aground?”

“Yes'm--she--”

“Don't say yes'm--say Aunt Sally.  Where'd she get aground?”

I didn't rightly know what to say, because I didn't know whether the
boat would be coming up the river or down.  But I go a good deal on
instinct; and my instinct said she would be coming up--from down towards
Orleans. That didn't help me much, though; for I didn't know the names
of bars down that way.  I see I'd got to invent a bar, or forget the
name of the one we got aground on--or--Now I struck an idea, and fetched
it out:

“It warn't the grounding--that didn't keep us back but a little.  We
blowed out a cylinder-head.”

“Good gracious! anybody hurt?”

“No'm.  Killed a nigger.”

“Well, it's lucky; because sometimes people do get hurt.  Two years ago
last Christmas your uncle Silas was coming up from Newrleans on the old
Lally Rook, and she blowed out a cylinder-head and crippled a man.  And
I think he died afterwards.  He was a Baptist.  Your uncle Silas knowed
a family in Baton Rouge that knowed his people very well.  Yes, I
remember now, he _did_ die.  Mortification set in, and they had to
amputate him. But it didn't save him.  Yes, it was mortification--that
was it.  He turned blue all over, and died in the hope of a glorious
resurrection. They say he was a sight to look at.  Your uncle's been up
to the town every day to fetch you. And he's gone again, not more'n an
hour ago; he'll be back any minute now. You must a met him on the road,
didn't you?--oldish man, with a--”

“No, I didn't see nobody, Aunt Sally.  The boat landed just at daylight,
and I left my baggage on the wharf-boat and went looking around the town
and out a piece in the country, to put in the time and not get here too
soon; and so I come down the back way.”

“Who'd you give the baggage to?”

“Nobody.”

“Why, child, it 'll be stole!”

“Not where I hid it I reckon it won't,” I says.

“How'd you get your breakfast so early on the boat?”

It was kinder thin ice, but I says:

“The captain see me standing around, and told me I better have something
to eat before I went ashore; so he took me in the texas to the officers'
lunch, and give me all I wanted.”

I was getting so uneasy I couldn't listen good.  I had my mind on the
children all the time; I wanted to get them out to one side and pump
them a little, and find out who I was.  But I couldn't get no show, Mrs.
Phelps kept it up and run on so.  Pretty soon she made the cold chills
streak all down my back, because she says:

“But here we're a-running on this way, and you hain't told me a word
about Sis, nor any of them.  Now I'll rest my works a little, and you
start up yourn; just tell me _everything_--tell me all about 'm all every
one of 'm; and how they are, and what they're doing, and what they told
you to tell me; and every last thing you can think of.”

Well, I see I was up a stump--and up it good.  Providence had stood by
me this fur all right, but I was hard and tight aground now.  I see it
warn't a bit of use to try to go ahead--I'd got to throw up my hand.  So
I says to myself, here's another place where I got to resk the truth.
 I opened my mouth to begin; but she grabbed me and hustled me in behind
the bed, and says:

“Here he comes!  Stick your head down lower--there, that'll do; you can't
be seen now.  Don't you let on you're here.  I'll play a joke on him.
Children, don't you say a word.”

I see I was in a fix now.  But it warn't no use to worry; there warn't
nothing to do but just hold still, and try and be ready to stand from
under when the lightning struck.

I had just one little glimpse of the old gentleman when he come in; then
the bed hid him.  Mrs. Phelps she jumps for him, and says:

“Has he come?”

“No,” says her husband.

“Good-_ness_ gracious!” she says, “what in the warld can have become of
him?”

“I can't imagine,” says the old gentleman; “and I must say it makes me
dreadful uneasy.”

“Uneasy!” she says; “I'm ready to go distracted!  He _must_ a come; and
you've missed him along the road.  I _know_ it's so--something tells me
so.”

“Why, Sally, I _couldn't_ miss him along the road--_you_ know that.”

“But oh, dear, dear, what _will_ Sis say!  He must a come!  You must a
missed him.  He--”

“Oh, don't distress me any more'n I'm already distressed.  I don't know
what in the world to make of it.  I'm at my wit's end, and I don't mind
acknowledging 't I'm right down scared.  But there's no hope that he's
come; for he _couldn't_ come and me miss him.  Sally, it's terrible--just
terrible--something's happened to the boat, sure!”

“Why, Silas!  Look yonder!--up the road!--ain't that somebody coming?”

He sprung to the window at the head of the bed, and that give Mrs.
Phelps the chance she wanted.  She stooped down quick at the foot of the
bed and give me a pull, and out I come; and when he turned back from the
window there she stood, a-beaming and a-smiling like a house afire, and
I standing pretty meek and sweaty alongside.  The old gentleman stared,
and says:

“Why, who's that?”

“Who do you reckon 't is?”

“I hain't no idea.  Who _is_ it?”

“It's _Tom Sawyer!_”

By jings, I most slumped through the floor!  But there warn't no time to
swap knives; the old man grabbed me by the hand and shook, and kept on
shaking; and all the time how the woman did dance around and laugh and
cry; and then how they both did fire off questions about Sid, and Mary,
and the rest of the tribe.

But if they was joyful, it warn't nothing to what I was; for it was like
being born again, I was so glad to find out who I was.  Well, they froze
to me for two hours; and at last, when my chin was so tired it couldn't
hardly go any more, I had told them more about my family--I mean the
Sawyer family--than ever happened to any six Sawyer families.  And I
explained all about how we blowed out a cylinder-head at the mouth of
White River, and it took us three days to fix it.  Which was all right,
and worked first-rate; because _they_ didn't know but what it would take
three days to fix it.  If I'd a called it a bolthead it would a done
just as well.

Now I was feeling pretty comfortable all down one side, and pretty
uncomfortable all up the other.  Being Tom Sawyer was easy and
comfortable, and it stayed easy and comfortable till by and by I hear a
steamboat coughing along down the river.  Then I says to myself, s'pose
Tom Sawyer comes down on that boat?  And s'pose he steps in here any
minute, and sings out my name before I can throw him a wink to keep
quiet?

Well, I couldn't _have_ it that way; it wouldn't do at all.  I must go
up the road and waylay him.  So I told the folks I reckoned I would go
up to the town and fetch down my baggage.  The old gentleman was for
going along with me, but I said no, I could drive the horse myself, and
I druther he wouldn't take no trouble about me.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

SO I started for town in the wagon, and when I was half-way I see a
wagon coming, and sure enough it was Tom Sawyer, and I stopped and
waited till he come along.  I says “Hold on!” and it stopped alongside,
and his mouth opened up like a trunk, and stayed so; and he swallowed
two or three times like a person that's got a dry throat, and then says:

“I hain't ever done you no harm.  You know that.  So, then, what you
want to come back and ha'nt _me_ for?”

I says:

“I hain't come back--I hain't been _gone_.”

When he heard my voice it righted him up some, but he warn't quite
satisfied yet.  He says:

“Don't you play nothing on me, because I wouldn't on you.  Honest injun
now, you ain't a ghost?”

“Honest injun, I ain't,” I says.

“Well--I--I--well, that ought to settle it, of course; but I can't somehow
seem to understand it no way.  Looky here, warn't you ever murdered _at
all?_”

“No.  I warn't ever murdered at all--I played it on them.  You come in
here and feel of me if you don't believe me.”

So he done it; and it satisfied him; and he was that glad to see me
again he didn't know what to do.  And he wanted to know all about it
right off, because it was a grand adventure, and mysterious, and so it
hit him where he lived.  But I said, leave it alone till by and by; and
told his driver to wait, and we drove off a little piece, and I told
him the kind of a fix I was in, and what did he reckon we better do?  He
said, let him alone a minute, and don't disturb him.  So he thought and
thought, and pretty soon he says:

“It's all right; I've got it.  Take my trunk in your wagon, and let on
it's your'n; and you turn back and fool along slow, so as to get to the
house about the time you ought to; and I'll go towards town a piece, and
take a fresh start, and get there a quarter or a half an hour after you;
and you needn't let on to know me at first.”

I says:

“All right; but wait a minute.  There's one more thing--a thing that
_nobody_ don't know but me.  And that is, there's a nigger here that
I'm a-trying to steal out of slavery, and his name is _Jim_--old Miss
Watson's Jim.”

He says:

“What!  Why, Jim is--”

He stopped and went to studying.  I says:

“I know what you'll say.  You'll say it's dirty, low-down business; but
what if it is?  I'm low down; and I'm a-going to steal him, and I want
you keep mum and not let on.  Will you?”

His eye lit up, and he says:

“I'll _help_ you steal him!”

Well, I let go all holts then, like I was shot.  It was the most
astonishing speech I ever heard--and I'm bound to say Tom Sawyer fell
considerable in my estimation.  Only I couldn't believe it.  Tom Sawyer
a _nigger-stealer!_

“Oh, shucks!”  I says; “you're joking.”

“I ain't joking, either.”

“Well, then,” I says, “joking or no joking, if you hear anything said
about a runaway nigger, don't forget to remember that _you_ don't know
nothing about him, and I don't know nothing about him.”

Then we took the trunk and put it in my wagon, and he drove off his
way and I drove mine.  But of course I forgot all about driving slow on
accounts of being glad and full of thinking; so I got home a heap too
quick for that length of a trip.  The old gentleman was at the door, and
he says:

“Why, this is wonderful!  Whoever would a thought it was in that mare
to do it?  I wish we'd a timed her.  And she hain't sweated a hair--not
a hair. It's wonderful.  Why, I wouldn't take a hundred dollars for that
horse now--I wouldn't, honest; and yet I'd a sold her for fifteen before,
and thought 'twas all she was worth.”

That's all he said.  He was the innocentest, best old soul I ever see.
But it warn't surprising; because he warn't only just a farmer, he was
a preacher, too, and had a little one-horse log church down back of the
plantation, which he built it himself at his own expense, for a church
and schoolhouse, and never charged nothing for his preaching, and it was
worth it, too.  There was plenty other farmer-preachers like that, and
done the same way, down South.

In about half an hour Tom's wagon drove up to the front stile, and Aunt
Sally she see it through the window, because it was only about fifty
yards, and says:

“Why, there's somebody come!  I wonder who 'tis?  Why, I do believe it's
a stranger.  Jimmy” (that's one of the children) “run and tell Lize to
put on another plate for dinner.”

Everybody made a rush for the front door, because, of course, a stranger
don't come _every_ year, and so he lays over the yaller-fever, for
interest, when he does come.  Tom was over the stile and starting for
the house; the wagon was spinning up the road for the village, and we
was all bunched in the front door.  Tom had his store clothes on, and an
audience--and that was always nuts for Tom Sawyer.  In them circumstances
it warn't no trouble to him to throw in an amount of style that was
suitable.  He warn't a boy to meeky along up that yard like a sheep; no,
he come ca'm and important, like the ram.  When he got a-front of us he
lifts his hat ever so gracious and dainty, like it was the lid of a box
that had butterflies asleep in it and he didn't want to disturb them,
and says:

“Mr. Archibald Nichols, I presume?”

“No, my boy,” says the old gentleman, “I'm sorry to say 't your driver
has deceived you; Nichols's place is down a matter of three mile more.
Come in, come in.”

Tom he took a look back over his shoulder, and says, “Too late--he's out
of sight.”

“Yes, he's gone, my son, and you must come in and eat your dinner with
us; and then we'll hitch up and take you down to Nichols's.”

“Oh, I _can't_ make you so much trouble; I couldn't think of it.  I'll
walk--I don't mind the distance.”

“But we won't _let_ you walk--it wouldn't be Southern hospitality to do
it. Come right in.”

“Oh, _do_,” says Aunt Sally; “it ain't a bit of trouble to us, not a
bit in the world.  You must stay.  It's a long, dusty three mile, and
we can't let you walk.  And, besides, I've already told 'em to put on
another plate when I see you coming; so you mustn't disappoint us.  Come
right in and make yourself at home.”

So Tom he thanked them very hearty and handsome, and let himself be
persuaded, and come in; and when he was in he said he was a stranger
from Hicksville, Ohio, and his name was William Thompson--and he made
another bow.

Well, he run on, and on, and on, making up stuff about Hicksville and
everybody in it he could invent, and I getting a little nervious, and
wondering how this was going to help me out of my scrape; and at last,
still talking along, he reached over and kissed Aunt Sally right on the
mouth, and then settled back again in his chair comfortable, and was
going on talking; but she jumped up and wiped it off with the back of
her hand, and says:

“You owdacious puppy!”

He looked kind of hurt, and says:

“I'm surprised at you, m'am.”

“You're s'rp--Why, what do you reckon I am?  I've a good notion to take
and--Say, what do you mean by kissing me?”

He looked kind of humble, and says:

“I didn't mean nothing, m'am.  I didn't mean no harm.  I--I--thought you'd
like it.”

“Why, you born fool!”  She took up the spinning stick, and it looked
like it was all she could do to keep from giving him a crack with it.
 “What made you think I'd like it?”

“Well, I don't know.  Only, they--they--told me you would.”

“_They_ told you I would.  Whoever told you's _another_ lunatic.  I
never heard the beat of it.  Who's _they_?”

“Why, everybody.  They all said so, m'am.”

It was all she could do to hold in; and her eyes snapped, and her
fingers worked like she wanted to scratch him; and she says:

“Who's 'everybody'?  Out with their names, or ther'll be an idiot
short.”

He got up and looked distressed, and fumbled his hat, and says:

“I'm sorry, and I warn't expecting it.  They told me to.  They all told
me to.  They all said, kiss her; and said she'd like it.  They all said
it--every one of them.  But I'm sorry, m'am, and I won't do it no more--I
won't, honest.”

“You won't, won't you?  Well, I sh'd _reckon_ you won't!”

“No'm, I'm honest about it; I won't ever do it again--till you ask me.”

“Till I _ask_ you!  Well, I never see the beat of it in my born days!
 I lay you'll be the Methusalem-numskull of creation before ever I ask
you--or the likes of you.”

“Well,” he says, “it does surprise me so.  I can't make it out, somehow.
They said you would, and I thought you would.  But--” He stopped and
looked around slow, like he wished he could run across a friendly eye
somewheres, and fetched up on the old gentleman's, and says, “Didn't
_you_ think she'd like me to kiss her, sir?”

“Why, no; I--I--well, no, I b'lieve I didn't.”

Then he looks on around the same way to me, and says:

“Tom, didn't _you_ think Aunt Sally 'd open out her arms and say, 'Sid
Sawyer--'”

“My land!” she says, breaking in and jumping for him, “you impudent
young rascal, to fool a body so--” and was going to hug him, but he
fended her off, and says:

“No, not till you've asked me first.”

So she didn't lose no time, but asked him; and hugged him and kissed
him over and over again, and then turned him over to the old man, and he
took what was left.  And after they got a little quiet again she says:

“Why, dear me, I never see such a surprise.  We warn't looking for _you_
at all, but only Tom.  Sis never wrote to me about anybody coming but
him.”

“It's because it warn't _intended_ for any of us to come but Tom,” he
says; “but I begged and begged, and at the last minute she let me
come, too; so, coming down the river, me and Tom thought it would be a
first-rate surprise for him to come here to the house first, and for me
to by and by tag along and drop in, and let on to be a stranger.  But it
was a mistake, Aunt Sally.  This ain't no healthy place for a stranger
to come.”

“No--not impudent whelps, Sid.  You ought to had your jaws boxed; I
hain't been so put out since I don't know when.  But I don't care, I
don't mind the terms--I'd be willing to stand a thousand such jokes to
have you here. Well, to think of that performance!  I don't deny it, I
was most putrified with astonishment when you give me that smack.”

We had dinner out in that broad open passage betwixt the house and
the kitchen; and there was things enough on that table for seven
families--and all hot, too; none of your flabby, tough meat that's laid
in a cupboard in a damp cellar all night and tastes like a hunk of
old cold cannibal in the morning.  Uncle Silas he asked a pretty long
blessing over it, but it was worth it; and it didn't cool it a bit,
neither, the way I've seen them kind of interruptions do lots of times.
 There was a considerable good deal of talk all the afternoon, and me
and Tom was on the lookout all the time; but it warn't no use, they
didn't happen to say nothing about any runaway nigger, and we was afraid
to try to work up to it.  But at supper, at night, one of the little
boys says:

“Pa, mayn't Tom and Sid and me go to the show?”

“No,” says the old man, “I reckon there ain't going to be any; and you
couldn't go if there was; because the runaway nigger told Burton and
me all about that scandalous show, and Burton said he would tell the
people; so I reckon they've drove the owdacious loafers out of town
before this time.”

So there it was!--but I couldn't help it.  Tom and me was to sleep in the
same room and bed; so, being tired, we bid good-night and went up to
bed right after supper, and clumb out of the window and down the
lightning-rod, and shoved for the town; for I didn't believe anybody was
going to give the king and the duke a hint, and so if I didn't hurry up
and give them one they'd get into trouble sure.

On the road Tom he told me all about how it was reckoned I was murdered,
and how pap disappeared pretty soon, and didn't come back no more, and
what a stir there was when Jim run away; and I told Tom all about our
Royal Nonesuch rapscallions, and as much of the raft voyage as I had
time to; and as we struck into the town and up through the the middle of
it--it was as much as half-after eight, then--here comes a raging rush of
people with torches, and an awful whooping and yelling, and banging tin
pans and blowing horns; and we jumped to one side to let them go by;
and as they went by I see they had the king and the duke astraddle of a
rail--that is, I knowed it _was_ the king and the duke, though they was
all over tar and feathers, and didn't look like nothing in the
world that was human--just looked like a couple of monstrous big
soldier-plumes.  Well, it made me sick to see it; and I was sorry for
them poor pitiful rascals, it seemed like I couldn't ever feel any
hardness against them any more in the world.  It was a dreadful thing to
see.  Human beings _can_ be awful cruel to one another.

We see we was too late--couldn't do no good.  We asked some stragglers
about it, and they said everybody went to the show looking very
innocent; and laid low and kept dark till the poor old king was in the
middle of his cavortings on the stage; then somebody give a signal, and
the house rose up and went for them.

So we poked along back home, and I warn't feeling so brash as I was
before, but kind of ornery, and humble, and to blame, somehow--though
I hadn't done nothing.  But that's always the way; it don't make no
difference whether you do right or wrong, a person's conscience ain't
got no sense, and just goes for him anyway.  If I had a yaller dog that
didn't know no more than a person's conscience does I would pison him.
It takes up more room than all the rest of a person's insides, and yet
ain't no good, nohow.  Tom Sawyer he says the same.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

WE stopped talking, and got to thinking.  By and by Tom says:

“Looky here, Huck, what fools we are to not think of it before!  I bet I
know where Jim is.”

“No!  Where?”

“In that hut down by the ash-hopper.  Why, looky here.  When we was at
dinner, didn't you see a nigger man go in there with some vittles?”

“Yes.”

“What did you think the vittles was for?”

“For a dog.”

“So 'd I. Well, it wasn't for a dog.”

“Why?”

“Because part of it was watermelon.”

“So it was--I noticed it.  Well, it does beat all that I never thought
about a dog not eating watermelon.  It shows how a body can see and
don't see at the same time.”

“Well, the nigger unlocked the padlock when he went in, and he locked it
again when he came out.  He fetched uncle a key about the time we got up
from table--same key, I bet.  Watermelon shows man, lock shows prisoner;
and it ain't likely there's two prisoners on such a little plantation,
and where the people's all so kind and good.  Jim's the prisoner.  All
right--I'm glad we found it out detective fashion; I wouldn't give shucks
for any other way.  Now you work your mind, and study out a plan to
steal Jim, and I will study out one, too; and we'll take the one we like
the best.”

What a head for just a boy to have!  If I had Tom Sawyer's head I
wouldn't trade it off to be a duke, nor mate of a steamboat, nor clown
in a circus, nor nothing I can think of.  I went to thinking out a plan,
but only just to be doing something; I knowed very well where the right
plan was going to come from.  Pretty soon Tom says:

“Ready?”

“Yes,” I says.

“All right--bring it out.”

“My plan is this,” I says.  “We can easy find out if it's Jim in there.
Then get up my canoe to-morrow night, and fetch my raft over from the
island.  Then the first dark night that comes steal the key out of the
old man's britches after he goes to bed, and shove off down the river
on the raft with Jim, hiding daytimes and running nights, the way me and
Jim used to do before.  Wouldn't that plan work?”

“_Work_?  Why, cert'nly it would work, like rats a-fighting.  But it's
too blame' simple; there ain't nothing _to_ it.  What's the good of a
plan that ain't no more trouble than that?  It's as mild as goose-milk.
 Why, Huck, it wouldn't make no more talk than breaking into a soap
factory.”

I never said nothing, because I warn't expecting nothing different; but
I knowed mighty well that whenever he got _his_ plan ready it wouldn't
have none of them objections to it.

And it didn't.  He told me what it was, and I see in a minute it was
worth fifteen of mine for style, and would make Jim just as free a man
as mine would, and maybe get us all killed besides.  So I was satisfied,
and said we would waltz in on it.  I needn't tell what it was here,
because I knowed it wouldn't stay the way, it was.  I knowed he would be
changing it around every which way as we went along, and heaving in new
bullinesses wherever he got a chance.  And that is what he done.

Well, one thing was dead sure, and that was that Tom Sawyer was in
earnest, and was actuly going to help steal that nigger out of slavery.
That was the thing that was too many for me.  Here was a boy that was
respectable and well brung up; and had a character to lose; and folks at
home that had characters; and he was bright and not leather-headed; and
knowing and not ignorant; and not mean, but kind; and yet here he was,
without any more pride, or rightness, or feeling, than to stoop to
this business, and make himself a shame, and his family a shame,
before everybody.  I _couldn't_ understand it no way at all.  It was
outrageous, and I knowed I ought to just up and tell him so; and so be
his true friend, and let him quit the thing right where he was and save
himself. And I _did_ start to tell him; but he shut me up, and says:

“Don't you reckon I know what I'm about?  Don't I generly know what I'm
about?”

“Yes.”

“Didn't I _say_ I was going to help steal the nigger?”

“Yes.”

“_Well_, then.”

That's all he said, and that's all I said.  It warn't no use to say any
more; because when he said he'd do a thing, he always done it.  But I
couldn't make out how he was willing to go into this thing; so I just
let it go, and never bothered no more about it.  If he was bound to have
it so, I couldn't help it.

When we got home the house was all dark and still; so we went on down to
the hut by the ash-hopper for to examine it.  We went through the yard
so as to see what the hounds would do.  They knowed us, and didn't make
no more noise than country dogs is always doing when anything comes by
in the night.  When we got to the cabin we took a look at the front and
the two sides; and on the side I warn't acquainted with--which was the
north side--we found a square window-hole, up tolerable high, with just
one stout board nailed across it.  I says:

“Here's the ticket.  This hole's big enough for Jim to get through if we
wrench off the board.”

Tom says:

“It's as simple as tit-tat-toe, three-in-a-row, and as easy as
playing hooky.  I should _hope_ we can find a way that's a little more
complicated than _that_, Huck Finn.”

“Well, then,” I says, “how 'll it do to saw him out, the way I done
before I was murdered that time?”

“That's more _like_,” he says.  “It's real mysterious, and troublesome,
and good,” he says; “but I bet we can find a way that's twice as long.
 There ain't no hurry; le's keep on looking around.”

Betwixt the hut and the fence, on the back side, was a lean-to that
joined the hut at the eaves, and was made out of plank.  It was as long
as the hut, but narrow--only about six foot wide.  The door to it was at
the south end, and was padlocked.  Tom he went to the soap-kettle and
searched around, and fetched back the iron thing they lift the lid with;
so he took it and prized out one of the staples.  The chain fell down,
and we opened the door and went in, and shut it, and struck a match,
and see the shed was only built against a cabin and hadn't no connection
with it; and there warn't no floor to the shed, nor nothing in it but
some old rusty played-out hoes and spades and picks and a crippled plow.
 The match went out, and so did we, and shoved in the staple again, and
the door was locked as good as ever. Tom was joyful.  He says;

“Now we're all right.  We'll _dig_ him out.  It 'll take about a week!”

Then we started for the house, and I went in the back door--you only have
to pull a buckskin latch-string, they don't fasten the doors--but that
warn't romantical enough for Tom Sawyer; no way would do him but he must
climb up the lightning-rod.  But after he got up half way about three
times, and missed fire and fell every time, and the last time most
busted his brains out, he thought he'd got to give it up; but after he
was rested he allowed he would give her one more turn for luck, and this
time he made the trip.

In the morning we was up at break of day, and down to the nigger cabins
to pet the dogs and make friends with the nigger that fed Jim--if it
_was_ Jim that was being fed.  The niggers was just getting through
breakfast and starting for the fields; and Jim's nigger was piling up
a tin pan with bread and meat and things; and whilst the others was
leaving, the key come from the house.

This nigger had a good-natured, chuckle-headed face, and his wool was
all tied up in little bunches with thread.  That was to keep witches
off.  He said the witches was pestering him awful these nights, and
making him see all kinds of strange things, and hear all kinds of
strange words and noises, and he didn't believe he was ever witched so
long before in his life.  He got so worked up, and got to running on so
about his troubles, he forgot all about what he'd been a-going to do.
 So Tom says:

“What's the vittles for?  Going to feed the dogs?”

The nigger kind of smiled around gradually over his face, like when you
heave a brickbat in a mud-puddle, and he says:

“Yes, Mars Sid, A dog.  Cur'us dog, too.  Does you want to go en look at
'im?”

“Yes.”

I hunched Tom, and whispers:

“You going, right here in the daybreak?  _that_ warn't the plan.”

“No, it warn't; but it's the plan _now_.”

So, drat him, we went along, but I didn't like it much.  When we got in
we couldn't hardly see anything, it was so dark; but Jim was there, sure
enough, and could see us; and he sings out:

“Why, _Huck_!  En good _lan_'! ain' dat Misto Tom?”

I just knowed how it would be; I just expected it.  I didn't know
nothing to do; and if I had I couldn't a done it, because that nigger
busted in and says:

“Why, de gracious sakes! do he know you genlmen?”

We could see pretty well now.  Tom he looked at the nigger, steady and
kind of wondering, and says:

“Does _who_ know us?”

“Why, dis-yer runaway nigger.”

“I don't reckon he does; but what put that into your head?”

“What _put_ it dar?  Didn' he jis' dis minute sing out like he knowed
you?”

Tom says, in a puzzled-up kind of way:

“Well, that's mighty curious.  _Who_ sung out? _when_ did he sing out?
 _what_ did he sing out?” And turns to me, perfectly ca'm, and says,
“Did _you_ hear anybody sing out?”

Of course there warn't nothing to be said but the one thing; so I says:

“No; I ain't heard nobody say nothing.”

Then he turns to Jim, and looks him over like he never see him before,
and says:

“Did you sing out?”

“No, sah,” says Jim; “I hain't said nothing, sah.”

“Not a word?”

“No, sah, I hain't said a word.”

“Did you ever see us before?”

“No, sah; not as I knows on.”

So Tom turns to the nigger, which was looking wild and distressed, and
says, kind of severe:

“What do you reckon's the matter with you, anyway?  What made you think
somebody sung out?”

“Oh, it's de dad-blame' witches, sah, en I wisht I was dead, I do.
 Dey's awluz at it, sah, en dey do mos' kill me, dey sk'yers me so.
 Please to don't tell nobody 'bout it sah, er ole Mars Silas he'll scole
me; 'kase he say dey _ain't_ no witches.  I jis' wish to goodness he was
heah now--_den_ what would he say!  I jis' bet he couldn' fine no way to
git aroun' it _dis_ time.  But it's awluz jis' so; people dat's _sot_,
stays sot; dey won't look into noth'n'en fine it out f'r deyselves, en
when _you_ fine it out en tell um 'bout it, dey doan' b'lieve you.”

Tom give him a dime, and said we wouldn't tell nobody; and told him to
buy some more thread to tie up his wool with; and then looks at Jim, and
says:

“I wonder if Uncle Silas is going to hang this nigger.  If I was to
catch a nigger that was ungrateful enough to run away, I wouldn't give
him up, I'd hang him.”  And whilst the nigger stepped to the door to
look at the dime and bite it to see if it was good, he whispers to Jim
and says:

“Don't ever let on to know us.  And if you hear any digging going on
nights, it's us; we're going to set you free.”

Jim only had time to grab us by the hand and squeeze it; then the nigger
come back, and we said we'd come again some time if the nigger wanted
us to; and he said he would, more particular if it was dark, because the
witches went for him mostly in the dark, and it was good to have folks
around then.




CHAPTER XXXV.

IT would be most an hour yet till breakfast, so we left and struck down
into the woods; because Tom said we got to have _some_ light to see how
to dig by, and a lantern makes too much, and might get us into trouble;
what we must have was a lot of them rotten chunks that's called
fox-fire, and just makes a soft kind of a glow when you lay them in a
dark place.  We fetched an armful and hid it in the weeds, and set down
to rest, and Tom says, kind of dissatisfied:

“Blame it, this whole thing is just as easy and awkward as it can be.
And so it makes it so rotten difficult to get up a difficult plan.
 There ain't no watchman to be drugged--now there _ought_ to be a
watchman.  There ain't even a dog to give a sleeping-mixture to.  And
there's Jim chained by one leg, with a ten-foot chain, to the leg of his
bed:  why, all you got to do is to lift up the bedstead and slip off
the chain.  And Uncle Silas he trusts everybody; sends the key to the
punkin-headed nigger, and don't send nobody to watch the nigger.  Jim
could a got out of that window-hole before this, only there wouldn't be
no use trying to travel with a ten-foot chain on his leg.  Why, drat it,
Huck, it's the stupidest arrangement I ever see. You got to invent _all_
the difficulties.  Well, we can't help it; we got to do the best we can
with the materials we've got. Anyhow, there's one thing--there's more
honor in getting him out through a lot of difficulties and dangers,
where there warn't one of them furnished to you by the people who it was
their duty to furnish them, and you had to contrive them all out of your
own head.  Now look at just that one thing of the lantern.  When you
come down to the cold facts, we simply got to _let on_ that a lantern's
resky.  Why, we could work with a torchlight procession if we wanted to,
I believe.  Now, whilst I think of it, we got to hunt up something to
make a saw out of the first chance we get.”

“What do we want of a saw?”

“What do we _want_ of it?  Hain't we got to saw the leg of Jim's bed
off, so as to get the chain loose?”

“Why, you just said a body could lift up the bedstead and slip the chain
off.”

“Well, if that ain't just like you, Huck Finn.  You _can_ get up the
infant-schooliest ways of going at a thing.  Why, hain't you ever read
any books at all?--Baron Trenck, nor Casanova, nor Benvenuto Chelleeny,
nor Henri IV., nor none of them heroes?  Who ever heard of getting a
prisoner loose in such an old-maidy way as that?  No; the way all the
best authorities does is to saw the bed-leg in two, and leave it just
so, and swallow the sawdust, so it can't be found, and put some dirt and
grease around the sawed place so the very keenest seneskal can't see
no sign of it's being sawed, and thinks the bed-leg is perfectly sound.
Then, the night you're ready, fetch the leg a kick, down she goes; slip
off your chain, and there you are.  Nothing to do but hitch your
rope ladder to the battlements, shin down it, break your leg in the
moat--because a rope ladder is nineteen foot too short, you know--and
there's your horses and your trusty vassles, and they scoop you up and
fling you across a saddle, and away you go to your native Langudoc, or
Navarre, or wherever it is. It's gaudy, Huck.  I wish there was a moat
to this cabin. If we get time, the night of the escape, we'll dig one.”

I says:

“What do we want of a moat when we're going to snake him out from under
the cabin?”

But he never heard me.  He had forgot me and everything else.  He had
his chin in his hand, thinking.  Pretty soon he sighs and shakes his
head; then sighs again, and says:

“No, it wouldn't do--there ain't necessity enough for it.”

“For what?”  I says.

“Why, to saw Jim's leg off,” he says.

“Good land!”  I says; “why, there ain't _no_ necessity for it.  And what
would you want to saw his leg off for, anyway?”

“Well, some of the best authorities has done it.  They couldn't get the
chain off, so they just cut their hand off and shoved.  And a leg would
be better still.  But we got to let that go.  There ain't necessity
enough in this case; and, besides, Jim's a nigger, and wouldn't
understand the reasons for it, and how it's the custom in Europe; so
we'll let it go.  But there's one thing--he can have a rope ladder; we
can tear up our sheets and make him a rope ladder easy enough.  And we
can send it to him in a pie; it's mostly done that way.  And I've et
worse pies.”

“Why, Tom Sawyer, how you talk,” I says; “Jim ain't got no use for a
rope ladder.”

“He _has_ got use for it.  How _you_ talk, you better say; you don't
know nothing about it.  He's _got_ to have a rope ladder; they all do.”

“What in the nation can he _do_ with it?”

“_Do_ with it?  He can hide it in his bed, can't he?”  That's what they
all do; and _he's_ got to, too.  Huck, you don't ever seem to want to do
anything that's regular; you want to be starting something fresh all the
time. S'pose he _don't_ do nothing with it? ain't it there in his bed,
for a clew, after he's gone? and don't you reckon they'll want clews?
 Of course they will.  And you wouldn't leave them any?  That would be a
_pretty_ howdy-do, _wouldn't_ it!  I never heard of such a thing.”

“Well,” I says, “if it's in the regulations, and he's got to have
it, all right, let him have it; because I don't wish to go back on no
regulations; but there's one thing, Tom Sawyer--if we go to tearing up
our sheets to make Jim a rope ladder, we're going to get into trouble
with Aunt Sally, just as sure as you're born.  Now, the way I look at
it, a hickry-bark ladder don't cost nothing, and don't waste nothing,
and is just as good to load up a pie with, and hide in a straw tick,
as any rag ladder you can start; and as for Jim, he ain't had no
experience, and so he don't care what kind of a--”

“Oh, shucks, Huck Finn, if I was as ignorant as you I'd keep
still--that's what I'D do.  Who ever heard of a state prisoner escaping
by a hickry-bark ladder?  Why, it's perfectly ridiculous.”

“Well, all right, Tom, fix it your own way; but if you'll take my
advice, you'll let me borrow a sheet off of the clothesline.”

He said that would do.  And that gave him another idea, and he says:

“Borrow a shirt, too.”

“What do we want of a shirt, Tom?”

“Want it for Jim to keep a journal on.”

“Journal your granny--_Jim_ can't write.”

“S'pose he _can't_ write--he can make marks on the shirt, can't he, if
we make him a pen out of an old pewter spoon or a piece of an old iron
barrel-hoop?”

“Why, Tom, we can pull a feather out of a goose and make him a better
one; and quicker, too.”

“_Prisoners_ don't have geese running around the donjon-keep to pull
pens out of, you muggins.  They _always_ make their pens out of the
hardest, toughest, troublesomest piece of old brass candlestick or
something like that they can get their hands on; and it takes them weeks
and weeks and months and months to file it out, too, because they've got
to do it by rubbing it on the wall.  _They_ wouldn't use a goose-quill
if they had it. It ain't regular.”

“Well, then, what'll we make him the ink out of?”

“Many makes it out of iron-rust and tears; but that's the common sort
and women; the best authorities uses their own blood.  Jim can do that;
and when he wants to send any little common ordinary mysterious message
to let the world know where he's captivated, he can write it on the
bottom of a tin plate with a fork and throw it out of the window.  The
Iron Mask always done that, and it's a blame' good way, too.”

“Jim ain't got no tin plates.  They feed him in a pan.”

“That ain't nothing; we can get him some.”

“Can't nobody _read_ his plates.”

“That ain't got anything to _do_ with it, Huck Finn.  All _he's_ got to
do is to write on the plate and throw it out.  You don't _have_ to be
able to read it. Why, half the time you can't read anything a prisoner
writes on a tin plate, or anywhere else.”

“Well, then, what's the sense in wasting the plates?”

“Why, blame it all, it ain't the _prisoner's_ plates.”

“But it's _somebody's_ plates, ain't it?”

“Well, spos'n it is?  What does the _prisoner_ care whose--”

He broke off there, because we heard the breakfast-horn blowing.  So we
cleared out for the house.

Along during the morning I borrowed a sheet and a white shirt off of the
clothes-line; and I found an old sack and put them in it, and we went
down and got the fox-fire, and put that in too.  I called it borrowing,
because that was what pap always called it; but Tom said it warn't
borrowing, it was stealing.  He said we was representing prisoners; and
prisoners don't care how they get a thing so they get it, and nobody
don't blame them for it, either.  It ain't no crime in a prisoner to
steal the thing he needs to get away with, Tom said; it's his right; and
so, as long as we was representing a prisoner, we had a perfect right to
steal anything on this place we had the least use for to get ourselves
out of prison with.  He said if we warn't prisoners it would be a very
different thing, and nobody but a mean, ornery person would steal when
he warn't a prisoner.  So we allowed we would steal everything there was
that come handy.  And yet he made a mighty fuss, one day, after that,
when I stole a watermelon out of the nigger-patch and eat it; and he
made me go and give the niggers a dime without telling them what it
was for. Tom said that what he meant was, we could steal anything we
_needed_. Well, I says, I needed the watermelon.  But he said I didn't
need it to get out of prison with; there's where the difference was.
 He said if I'd a wanted it to hide a knife in, and smuggle it to Jim
to kill the seneskal with, it would a been all right.  So I let it go at
that, though I couldn't see no advantage in my representing a prisoner
if I got to set down and chaw over a lot of gold-leaf distinctions like
that every time I see a chance to hog a watermelon.

Well, as I was saying, we waited that morning till everybody was settled
down to business, and nobody in sight around the yard; then Tom he
carried the sack into the lean-to whilst I stood off a piece to keep
watch.  By and by he come out, and we went and set down on the woodpile
to talk.  He says:

“Everything's all right now except tools; and that's easy fixed.”

“Tools?”  I says.

“Yes.”

“Tools for what?”

“Why, to dig with.  We ain't a-going to _gnaw_ him out, are we?”

“Ain't them old crippled picks and things in there good enough to dig a
nigger out with?”  I says.

He turns on me, looking pitying enough to make a body cry, and says:

“Huck Finn, did you _ever_ hear of a prisoner having picks and shovels,
and all the modern conveniences in his wardrobe to dig himself out with?
 Now I want to ask you--if you got any reasonableness in you at all--what
kind of a show would _that_ give him to be a hero?  Why, they might as
well lend him the key and done with it.  Picks and shovels--why, they
wouldn't furnish 'em to a king.”

“Well, then,” I says, “if we don't want the picks and shovels, what do
we want?”

“A couple of case-knives.”

“To dig the foundations out from under that cabin with?”

“Yes.”

“Confound it, it's foolish, Tom.”

“It don't make no difference how foolish it is, it's the _right_ way--and
it's the regular way.  And there ain't no _other_ way, that ever I heard
of, and I've read all the books that gives any information about these
things. They always dig out with a case-knife--and not through dirt, mind
you; generly it's through solid rock.  And it takes them weeks and weeks
and weeks, and for ever and ever.  Why, look at one of them prisoners in
the bottom dungeon of the Castle Deef, in the harbor of Marseilles, that
dug himself out that way; how long was _he_ at it, you reckon?”

“I don't know.”

“Well, guess.”

“I don't know.  A month and a half.”

“_Thirty-seven year_--and he come out in China.  _That's_ the kind.  I
wish the bottom of _this_ fortress was solid rock.”

“_Jim_ don't know nobody in China.”

“What's _that_ got to do with it?  Neither did that other fellow.  But
you're always a-wandering off on a side issue.  Why can't you stick to
the main point?”

“All right--I don't care where he comes out, so he _comes_ out; and Jim
don't, either, I reckon.  But there's one thing, anyway--Jim's too old to
be dug out with a case-knife.  He won't last.”

“Yes he will _last_, too.  You don't reckon it's going to take
thirty-seven years to dig out through a _dirt_ foundation, do you?”

“How long will it take, Tom?”

“Well, we can't resk being as long as we ought to, because it mayn't
take very long for Uncle Silas to hear from down there by New Orleans.
 He'll hear Jim ain't from there.  Then his next move will be to
advertise Jim, or something like that.  So we can't resk being as long
digging him out as we ought to.  By rights I reckon we ought to be
a couple of years; but we can't.  Things being so uncertain, what I
recommend is this:  that we really dig right in, as quick as we can;
and after that, we can _let on_, to ourselves, that we was at it
thirty-seven years.  Then we can snatch him out and rush him away the
first time there's an alarm.  Yes, I reckon that 'll be the best way.”

“Now, there's _sense_ in that,” I says.  “Letting on don't cost nothing;
letting on ain't no trouble; and if it's any object, I don't mind
letting on we was at it a hundred and fifty year.  It wouldn't strain
me none, after I got my hand in.  So I'll mosey along now, and smouch a
couple of case-knives.”

“Smouch three,” he says; “we want one to make a saw out of.”

“Tom, if it ain't unregular and irreligious to sejest it,” I says,
“there's an old rusty saw-blade around yonder sticking under the
weather-boarding behind the smoke-house.”

He looked kind of weary and discouraged-like, and says:

“It ain't no use to try to learn you nothing, Huck.  Run along and
smouch the knives--three of them.”  So I done it.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

AS soon as we reckoned everybody was asleep that night we went down the
lightning-rod, and shut ourselves up in the lean-to, and got out our
pile of fox-fire, and went to work.  We cleared everything out of the
way, about four or five foot along the middle of the bottom log.  Tom
said he was right behind Jim's bed now, and we'd dig in under it, and
when we got through there couldn't nobody in the cabin ever know there
was any hole there, because Jim's counter-pin hung down most to the
ground, and you'd have to raise it up and look under to see the hole.
 So we dug and dug with the case-knives till most midnight; and then
we was dog-tired, and our hands was blistered, and yet you couldn't see
we'd done anything hardly.  At last I says:

“This ain't no thirty-seven year job; this is a thirty-eight year job,
Tom Sawyer.”

He never said nothing.  But he sighed, and pretty soon he stopped
digging, and then for a good little while I knowed that he was thinking.
Then he says:

“It ain't no use, Huck, it ain't a-going to work.  If we was prisoners
it would, because then we'd have as many years as we wanted, and no
hurry; and we wouldn't get but a few minutes to dig, every day, while
they was changing watches, and so our hands wouldn't get blistered, and
we could keep it up right along, year in and year out, and do it right,
and the way it ought to be done.  But _we_ can't fool along; we got to
rush; we ain't got no time to spare.  If we was to put in another
night this way we'd have to knock off for a week to let our hands get
well--couldn't touch a case-knife with them sooner.”

“Well, then, what we going to do, Tom?”

“I'll tell you.  It ain't right, and it ain't moral, and I wouldn't like
it to get out; but there ain't only just the one way:  we got to dig him
out with the picks, and _let on_ it's case-knives.”

“_Now_ you're _talking_!”  I says; “your head gets leveler and leveler
all the time, Tom Sawyer,” I says.  “Picks is the thing, moral or no
moral; and as for me, I don't care shucks for the morality of it, nohow.
 When I start in to steal a nigger, or a watermelon, or a Sunday-school
book, I ain't no ways particular how it's done so it's done.  What I
want is my nigger; or what I want is my watermelon; or what I want is my
Sunday-school book; and if a pick's the handiest thing, that's the thing
I'm a-going to dig that nigger or that watermelon or that Sunday-school
book out with; and I don't give a dead rat what the authorities thinks
about it nuther.”

“Well,” he says, “there's excuse for picks and letting-on in a case like
this; if it warn't so, I wouldn't approve of it, nor I wouldn't stand by
and see the rules broke--because right is right, and wrong is wrong,
and a body ain't got no business doing wrong when he ain't ignorant and
knows better.  It might answer for _you_ to dig Jim out with a pick,
_without_ any letting on, because you don't know no better; but it
wouldn't for me, because I do know better.  Gimme a case-knife.”

He had his own by him, but I handed him mine.  He flung it down, and
says:

“Gimme a _case-knife_.”

I didn't know just what to do--but then I thought.  I scratched around
amongst the old tools, and got a pickaxe and give it to him, and he took
it and went to work, and never said a word.

He was always just that particular.  Full of principle.

So then I got a shovel, and then we picked and shoveled, turn about,
and made the fur fly.  We stuck to it about a half an hour, which was as
long as we could stand up; but we had a good deal of a hole to show for
it. When I got up stairs I looked out at the window and see Tom doing
his level best with the lightning-rod, but he couldn't come it, his
hands was so sore.  At last he says:

“It ain't no use, it can't be done.  What you reckon I better do?  Can't
you think of no way?”

“Yes,” I says, “but I reckon it ain't regular.  Come up the stairs, and
let on it's a lightning-rod.”

So he done it.

Next day Tom stole a pewter spoon and a brass candlestick in the house,
for to make some pens for Jim out of, and six tallow candles; and I
hung around the nigger cabins and laid for a chance, and stole three tin
plates.  Tom says it wasn't enough; but I said nobody wouldn't ever see
the plates that Jim throwed out, because they'd fall in the dog-fennel
and jimpson weeds under the window-hole--then we could tote them back and
he could use them over again.  So Tom was satisfied.  Then he says:

“Now, the thing to study out is, how to get the things to Jim.”

“Take them in through the hole,” I says, “when we get it done.”

He only just looked scornful, and said something about nobody ever heard
of such an idiotic idea, and then he went to studying.  By and by he
said he had ciphered out two or three ways, but there warn't no need to
decide on any of them yet.  Said we'd got to post Jim first.

That night we went down the lightning-rod a little after ten, and took
one of the candles along, and listened under the window-hole, and heard
Jim snoring; so we pitched it in, and it didn't wake him.  Then we
whirled in with the pick and shovel, and in about two hours and a half
the job was done.  We crept in under Jim's bed and into the cabin, and
pawed around and found the candle and lit it, and stood over Jim awhile,
and found him looking hearty and healthy, and then we woke him up gentle
and gradual.  He was so glad to see us he most cried; and called us
honey, and all the pet names he could think of; and was for having us
hunt up a cold-chisel to cut the chain off of his leg with right away,
and clearing out without losing any time.  But Tom he showed him how
unregular it would be, and set down and told him all about our plans,
and how we could alter them in a minute any time there was an alarm; and
not to be the least afraid, because we would see he got away, _sure_.
 So Jim he said it was all right, and we set there and talked over old
times awhile, and then Tom asked a lot of questions, and when Jim told
him Uncle Silas come in every day or two to pray with him, and Aunt
Sally come in to see if he was comfortable and had plenty to eat, and
both of them was kind as they could be, Tom says:

“_Now_ I know how to fix it.  We'll send you some things by them.”

I said, “Don't do nothing of the kind; it's one of the most jackass
ideas I ever struck;” but he never paid no attention to me; went right
on.  It was his way when he'd got his plans set.

So he told Jim how we'd have to smuggle in the rope-ladder pie and other
large things by Nat, the nigger that fed him, and he must be on the
lookout, and not be surprised, and not let Nat see him open them; and
we would put small things in uncle's coat-pockets and he must steal them
out; and we would tie things to aunt's apron-strings or put them in her
apron-pocket, if we got a chance; and told him what they would be and
what they was for.  And told him how to keep a journal on the shirt with
his blood, and all that. He told him everything.  Jim he couldn't see
no sense in the most of it, but he allowed we was white folks and knowed
better than him; so he was satisfied, and said he would do it all just
as Tom said.

Jim had plenty corn-cob pipes and tobacco; so we had a right down good
sociable time; then we crawled out through the hole, and so home to
bed, with hands that looked like they'd been chawed.  Tom was in high
spirits. He said it was the best fun he ever had in his life, and the
most intellectural; and said if he only could see his way to it we would
keep it up all the rest of our lives and leave Jim to our children to
get out; for he believed Jim would come to like it better and better the
more he got used to it.  He said that in that way it could be strung out
to as much as eighty year, and would be the best time on record.  And he
said it would make us all celebrated that had a hand in it.

In the morning we went out to the woodpile and chopped up the brass
candlestick into handy sizes, and Tom put them and the pewter spoon in
his pocket.  Then we went to the nigger cabins, and while I got Nat's
notice off, Tom shoved a piece of candlestick into the middle of a
corn-pone that was in Jim's pan, and we went along with Nat to see how
it would work, and it just worked noble; when Jim bit into it it most
mashed all his teeth out; and there warn't ever anything could a worked
better. Tom said so himself. Jim he never let on but what it was only
just a piece of rock or something like that that's always getting into
bread, you know; but after that he never bit into nothing but what he
jabbed his fork into it in three or four places first.

And whilst we was a-standing there in the dimmish light, here comes a
couple of the hounds bulging in from under Jim's bed; and they kept on
piling in till there was eleven of them, and there warn't hardly room
in there to get your breath.  By jings, we forgot to fasten that lean-to
door!  The nigger Nat he only just hollered “Witches” once, and keeled
over on to the floor amongst the dogs, and begun to groan like he was
dying.  Tom jerked the door open and flung out a slab of Jim's meat,
and the dogs went for it, and in two seconds he was out himself and back
again and shut the door, and I knowed he'd fixed the other door too.
Then he went to work on the nigger, coaxing him and petting him, and
asking him if he'd been imagining he saw something again.  He raised up,
and blinked his eyes around, and says:

“Mars Sid, you'll say I's a fool, but if I didn't b'lieve I see most a
million dogs, er devils, er some'n, I wisht I may die right heah in dese
tracks.  I did, mos' sholy.  Mars Sid, I _felt_ um--I _felt_ um, sah; dey
was all over me.  Dad fetch it, I jis' wisht I could git my han's on one
er dem witches jis' wunst--on'y jis' wunst--it's all I'd ast.  But mos'ly
I wisht dey'd lemme 'lone, I does.”

Tom says:

“Well, I tell you what I think.  What makes them come here just at this
runaway nigger's breakfast-time?  It's because they're hungry; that's
the reason.  You make them a witch pie; that's the thing for _you_ to
do.”

“But my lan', Mars Sid, how's I gwyne to make 'm a witch pie?  I doan'
know how to make it.  I hain't ever hearn er sich a thing b'fo'.”

“Well, then, I'll have to make it myself.”

“Will you do it, honey?--will you?  I'll wusshup de groun' und' yo' foot,
I will!”

“All right, I'll do it, seeing it's you, and you've been good to us and
showed us the runaway nigger.  But you got to be mighty careful.  When
we come around, you turn your back; and then whatever we've put in the
pan, don't you let on you see it at all.  And don't you look when Jim
unloads the pan--something might happen, I don't know what.  And above
all, don't you _handle_ the witch-things.”

“_Hannel 'M_, Mars Sid?  What _is_ you a-talkin' 'bout?  I wouldn'
lay de weight er my finger on um, not f'r ten hund'd thous'n billion
dollars, I wouldn't.”




CHAPTER XXXVII.

THAT was all fixed.  So then we went away and went to the rubbage-pile
in the back yard, where they keep the old boots, and rags, and pieces
of bottles, and wore-out tin things, and all such truck, and scratched
around and found an old tin washpan, and stopped up the holes as well as
we could, to bake the pie in, and took it down cellar and stole it full
of flour and started for breakfast, and found a couple of shingle-nails
that Tom said would be handy for a prisoner to scrabble his name and
sorrows on the dungeon walls with, and dropped one of them in Aunt
Sally's apron-pocket which was hanging on a chair, and t'other we stuck
in the band of Uncle Silas's hat, which was on the bureau, because we
heard the children say their pa and ma was going to the runaway nigger's
house this morning, and then went to breakfast, and Tom dropped the
pewter spoon in Uncle Silas's coat-pocket, and Aunt Sally wasn't come
yet, so we had to wait a little while.

And when she come she was hot and red and cross, and couldn't hardly
wait for the blessing; and then she went to sluicing out coffee with one
hand and cracking the handiest child's head with her thimble with the
other, and says:

“I've hunted high and I've hunted low, and it does beat all what _has_
become of your other shirt.”

My heart fell down amongst my lungs and livers and things, and a hard
piece of corn-crust started down my throat after it and got met on the
road with a cough, and was shot across the table, and took one of the
children in the eye and curled him up like a fishing-worm, and let a cry
out of him the size of a warwhoop, and Tom he turned kinder blue around
the gills, and it all amounted to a considerable state of things for
about a quarter of a minute or as much as that, and I would a sold out
for half price if there was a bidder.  But after that we was all right
again--it was the sudden surprise of it that knocked us so kind of cold.
Uncle Silas he says:

“It's most uncommon curious, I can't understand it.  I know perfectly
well I took it _off_, because--”

“Because you hain't got but one _on_.  Just _listen_ at the man!  I know
you took it off, and know it by a better way than your wool-gethering
memory, too, because it was on the clo's-line yesterday--I see it there
myself. But it's gone, that's the long and the short of it, and you'll
just have to change to a red flann'l one till I can get time to make a
new one. And it 'll be the third I've made in two years.  It just keeps
a body on the jump to keep you in shirts; and whatever you do manage to
_do_ with 'm all is more'n I can make out.  A body 'd think you _would_
learn to take some sort of care of 'em at your time of life.”

“I know it, Sally, and I do try all I can.  But it oughtn't to be
altogether my fault, because, you know, I don't see them nor have
nothing to do with them except when they're on me; and I don't believe
I've ever lost one of them _off_ of me.”

“Well, it ain't _your_ fault if you haven't, Silas; you'd a done it
if you could, I reckon.  And the shirt ain't all that's gone, nuther.
 Ther's a spoon gone; and _that_ ain't all.  There was ten, and now
ther's only nine. The calf got the shirt, I reckon, but the calf never
took the spoon, _that's_ certain.”

“Why, what else is gone, Sally?”

“Ther's six _candles_ gone--that's what.  The rats could a got the
candles, and I reckon they did; I wonder they don't walk off with the
whole place, the way you're always going to stop their holes and don't
do it; and if they warn't fools they'd sleep in your hair, Silas--_you'd_
never find it out; but you can't lay the _spoon_ on the rats, and that I
know.”

“Well, Sally, I'm in fault, and I acknowledge it; I've been remiss; but
I won't let to-morrow go by without stopping up them holes.”

“Oh, I wouldn't hurry; next year 'll do.  Matilda Angelina Araminta
_Phelps!_”

Whack comes the thimble, and the child snatches her claws out of the
sugar-bowl without fooling around any.  Just then the nigger woman steps
on to the passage, and says:

“Missus, dey's a sheet gone.”

“A _sheet_ gone!  Well, for the land's sake!”

“I'll stop up them holes to-day,” says Uncle Silas, looking sorrowful.

“Oh, _do_ shet up!--s'pose the rats took the _sheet_?  _where's_ it gone,
Lize?”

“Clah to goodness I hain't no notion, Miss' Sally.  She wuz on de
clo'sline yistiddy, but she done gone:  she ain' dah no mo' now.”

“I reckon the world _is_ coming to an end.  I _never_ see the beat of it
in all my born days.  A shirt, and a sheet, and a spoon, and six can--”

“Missus,” comes a young yaller wench, “dey's a brass cannelstick
miss'n.”

“Cler out from here, you hussy, er I'll take a skillet to ye!”

Well, she was just a-biling.  I begun to lay for a chance; I reckoned
I would sneak out and go for the woods till the weather moderated.  She
kept a-raging right along, running her insurrection all by herself, and
everybody else mighty meek and quiet; and at last Uncle Silas, looking
kind of foolish, fishes up that spoon out of his pocket.  She stopped,
with her mouth open and her hands up; and as for me, I wished I was in
Jeruslem or somewheres. But not long, because she says:

“It's _just_ as I expected.  So you had it in your pocket all the time;
and like as not you've got the other things there, too.  How'd it get
there?”

“I reely don't know, Sally,” he says, kind of apologizing, “or you know
I would tell.  I was a-studying over my text in Acts Seventeen before
breakfast, and I reckon I put it in there, not noticing, meaning to put
my Testament in, and it must be so, because my Testament ain't in; but
I'll go and see; and if the Testament is where I had it, I'll know I
didn't put it in, and that will show that I laid the Testament down and
took up the spoon, and--”

“Oh, for the land's sake!  Give a body a rest!  Go 'long now, the whole
kit and biling of ye; and don't come nigh me again till I've got back my
peace of mind.”

I'D a heard her if she'd a said it to herself, let alone speaking it
out; and I'd a got up and obeyed her if I'd a been dead.  As we was
passing through the setting-room the old man he took up his hat, and the
shingle-nail fell out on the floor, and he just merely picked it up and
laid it on the mantel-shelf, and never said nothing, and went out.  Tom
see him do it, and remembered about the spoon, and says:

“Well, it ain't no use to send things by _him_ no more, he ain't
reliable.” Then he says:  “But he done us a good turn with the spoon,
anyway, without knowing it, and so we'll go and do him one without _him_
knowing it--stop up his rat-holes.”

There was a noble good lot of them down cellar, and it took us a whole
hour, but we done the job tight and good and shipshape.  Then we heard
steps on the stairs, and blowed out our light and hid; and here comes
the old man, with a candle in one hand and a bundle of stuff in t'other,
looking as absent-minded as year before last.  He went a mooning around,
first to one rat-hole and then another, till he'd been to them all.
 Then he stood about five minutes, picking tallow-drip off of his candle
and thinking.  Then he turns off slow and dreamy towards the stairs,
saying:

“Well, for the life of me I can't remember when I done it.  I could
show her now that I warn't to blame on account of the rats.  But never
mind--let it go.  I reckon it wouldn't do no good.”

And so he went on a-mumbling up stairs, and then we left.  He was a
mighty nice old man.  And always is.

Tom was a good deal bothered about what to do for a spoon, but he said
we'd got to have it; so he took a think.  When he had ciphered it out
he told me how we was to do; then we went and waited around the
spoon-basket till we see Aunt Sally coming, and then Tom went to
counting the spoons and laying them out to one side, and I slid one of
them up my sleeve, and Tom says:

“Why, Aunt Sally, there ain't but nine spoons _yet_.”

She says:

“Go 'long to your play, and don't bother me.  I know better, I counted
'm myself.”

“Well, I've counted them twice, Aunty, and I can't make but nine.”

She looked out of all patience, but of course she come to count--anybody
would.

“I declare to gracious ther' _ain't_ but nine!” she says.  “Why, what in
the world--plague _take_ the things, I'll count 'm again.”

So I slipped back the one I had, and when she got done counting, she
says:

“Hang the troublesome rubbage, ther's _ten_ now!” and she looked huffy
and bothered both.  But Tom says:

“Why, Aunty, I don't think there's ten.”

“You numskull, didn't you see me _count 'm?_”

“I know, but--”

“Well, I'll count 'm _again_.”

So I smouched one, and they come out nine, same as the other time.
 Well, she _was_ in a tearing way--just a-trembling all over, she was so
mad.  But she counted and counted till she got that addled she'd start
to count in the basket for a spoon sometimes; and so, three times they
come out right, and three times they come out wrong.  Then she grabbed
up the basket and slammed it across the house and knocked the cat
galley-west; and she said cle'r out and let her have some peace, and if
we come bothering around her again betwixt that and dinner she'd skin
us.  So we had the odd spoon, and dropped it in her apron-pocket whilst
she was a-giving us our sailing orders, and Jim got it all right, along
with her shingle nail, before noon.  We was very well satisfied with
this business, and Tom allowed it was worth twice the trouble it took,
because he said _now_ she couldn't ever count them spoons twice alike
again to save her life; and wouldn't believe she'd counted them right if
she _did_; and said that after she'd about counted her head off for the
next three days he judged she'd give it up and offer to kill anybody
that wanted her to ever count them any more.

So we put the sheet back on the line that night, and stole one out of
her closet; and kept on putting it back and stealing it again for a
couple of days till she didn't know how many sheets she had any more,
and she didn't _care_, and warn't a-going to bullyrag the rest of her
soul out about it, and wouldn't count them again not to save her life;
she druther die first.

So we was all right now, as to the shirt and the sheet and the spoon
and the candles, by the help of the calf and the rats and the mixed-up
counting; and as to the candlestick, it warn't no consequence, it would
blow over by and by.

But that pie was a job; we had no end of trouble with that pie.  We
fixed it up away down in the woods, and cooked it there; and we got it
done at last, and very satisfactory, too; but not all in one day; and we
had to use up three wash-pans full of flour before we got through, and
we got burnt pretty much all over, in places, and eyes put out with
the smoke; because, you see, we didn't want nothing but a crust, and we
couldn't prop it up right, and she would always cave in.  But of course
we thought of the right way at last--which was to cook the ladder, too,
in the pie.  So then we laid in with Jim the second night, and tore
up the sheet all in little strings and twisted them together, and long
before daylight we had a lovely rope that you could a hung a person
with.  We let on it took nine months to make it.

And in the forenoon we took it down to the woods, but it wouldn't go
into the pie.  Being made of a whole sheet, that way, there was rope
enough for forty pies if we'd a wanted them, and plenty left over
for soup, or sausage, or anything you choose.  We could a had a whole
dinner.

But we didn't need it.  All we needed was just enough for the pie, and
so we throwed the rest away.  We didn't cook none of the pies in the
wash-pan--afraid the solder would melt; but Uncle Silas he had a noble
brass warming-pan which he thought considerable of, because it belonged
to one of his ancesters with a long wooden handle that come over from
England with William the Conqueror in the Mayflower or one of them early
ships and was hid away up garret with a lot of other old pots and things
that was valuable, not on account of being any account, because they
warn't, but on account of them being relicts, you know, and we snaked
her out, private, and took her down there, but she failed on the first
pies, because we didn't know how, but she come up smiling on the last
one.  We took and lined her with dough, and set her in the coals, and
loaded her up with rag rope, and put on a dough roof, and shut down the
lid, and put hot embers on top, and stood off five foot, with the long
handle, cool and comfortable, and in fifteen minutes she turned out a
pie that was a satisfaction to look at. But the person that et it would
want to fetch a couple of kags of toothpicks along, for if that rope
ladder wouldn't cramp him down to business I don't know nothing what I'm
talking about, and lay him in enough stomach-ache to last him till next
time, too.

Nat didn't look when we put the witch pie in Jim's pan; and we put the
three tin plates in the bottom of the pan under the vittles; and so Jim
got everything all right, and as soon as he was by himself he busted
into the pie and hid the rope ladder inside of his straw tick,
and scratched some marks on a tin plate and throwed it out of the
window-hole.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

MAKING them pens was a distressid tough job, and so was the saw; and Jim
allowed the inscription was going to be the toughest of all.  That's the
one which the prisoner has to scrabble on the wall.  But he had to have
it; Tom said he'd _got_ to; there warn't no case of a state prisoner not
scrabbling his inscription to leave behind, and his coat of arms.

“Look at Lady Jane Grey,” he says; “look at Gilford Dudley; look at old
Northumberland!  Why, Huck, s'pose it _is_ considerble trouble?--what
you going to do?--how you going to get around it?  Jim's _got_ to do his
inscription and coat of arms.  They all do.”

Jim says:

“Why, Mars Tom, I hain't got no coat o' arm; I hain't got nuffn but dish
yer ole shirt, en you knows I got to keep de journal on dat.”

“Oh, you don't understand, Jim; a coat of arms is very different.”

“Well,” I says, “Jim's right, anyway, when he says he ain't got no coat
of arms, because he hain't.”

“I reckon I knowed that,” Tom says, “but you bet he'll have one before
he goes out of this--because he's going out _right_, and there ain't
going to be no flaws in his record.”

So whilst me and Jim filed away at the pens on a brickbat apiece, Jim
a-making his'n out of the brass and I making mine out of the spoon,
Tom set to work to think out the coat of arms.  By and by he said he'd
struck so many good ones he didn't hardly know which to take, but there
was one which he reckoned he'd decide on.  He says:

“On the scutcheon we'll have a bend _or_ in the dexter base, a saltire
_murrey_ in the fess, with a dog, couchant, for common charge, and under
his foot a chain embattled, for slavery, with a chevron _vert_ in a
chief engrailed, and three invected lines on a field _azure_, with the
nombril points rampant on a dancette indented; crest, a runaway nigger,
_sable_, with his bundle over his shoulder on a bar sinister; and a
couple of gules for supporters, which is you and me; motto, _Maggiore
Fretta, Minore Otto._  Got it out of a book--means the more haste the
less speed.”

“Geewhillikins,” I says, “but what does the rest of it mean?”

“We ain't got no time to bother over that,” he says; “we got to dig in
like all git-out.”

“Well, anyway,” I says, “what's _some_ of it?  What's a fess?”

“A fess--a fess is--_you_ don't need to know what a fess is.  I'll show
him how to make it when he gets to it.”

“Shucks, Tom,” I says, “I think you might tell a person.  What's a bar
sinister?”

“Oh, I don't know.  But he's got to have it.  All the nobility does.”

That was just his way.  If it didn't suit him to explain a thing to you,
he wouldn't do it.  You might pump at him a week, it wouldn't make no
difference.

He'd got all that coat of arms business fixed, so now he started in to
finish up the rest of that part of the work, which was to plan out a
mournful inscription--said Jim got to have one, like they all done.  He
made up a lot, and wrote them out on a paper, and read them off, so:

1.  Here a captive heart busted. 2.  Here a poor prisoner, forsook by
the world and friends, fretted his sorrowful life. 3.  Here a lonely
heart broke, and a worn spirit went to its rest, after thirty-seven
years of solitary captivity. 4.  Here, homeless and friendless, after
thirty-seven years of bitter captivity, perished a noble stranger,
natural son of Louis XIV.

Tom's voice trembled whilst he was reading them, and he most broke down.
When he got done he couldn't no way make up his mind which one for Jim
to scrabble on to the wall, they was all so good; but at last he allowed
he would let him scrabble them all on.  Jim said it would take him a
year to scrabble such a lot of truck on to the logs with a nail, and he
didn't know how to make letters, besides; but Tom said he would block
them out for him, and then he wouldn't have nothing to do but just
follow the lines.  Then pretty soon he says:

“Come to think, the logs ain't a-going to do; they don't have log walls
in a dungeon:  we got to dig the inscriptions into a rock.  We'll fetch
a rock.”

Jim said the rock was worse than the logs; he said it would take him
such a pison long time to dig them into a rock he wouldn't ever get out.
 But Tom said he would let me help him do it.  Then he took a look to
see how me and Jim was getting along with the pens.  It was most pesky
tedious hard work and slow, and didn't give my hands no show to get
well of the sores, and we didn't seem to make no headway, hardly; so Tom
says:

“I know how to fix it.  We got to have a rock for the coat of arms and
mournful inscriptions, and we can kill two birds with that same rock.
There's a gaudy big grindstone down at the mill, and we'll smouch it,
and carve the things on it, and file out the pens and the saw on it,
too.”

It warn't no slouch of an idea; and it warn't no slouch of a grindstone
nuther; but we allowed we'd tackle it.  It warn't quite midnight yet,
so we cleared out for the mill, leaving Jim at work.  We smouched the
grindstone, and set out to roll her home, but it was a most nation tough
job. Sometimes, do what we could, we couldn't keep her from falling
over, and she come mighty near mashing us every time.  Tom said she was
going to get one of us, sure, before we got through.  We got her half
way; and then we was plumb played out, and most drownded with sweat.  We
see it warn't no use; we got to go and fetch Jim. So he raised up his
bed and slid the chain off of the bed-leg, and wrapt it round and round
his neck, and we crawled out through our hole and down there, and Jim
and me laid into that grindstone and walked her along like nothing; and
Tom superintended.  He could out-superintend any boy I ever see.  He
knowed how to do everything.

Our hole was pretty big, but it warn't big enough to get the grindstone
through; but Jim he took the pick and soon made it big enough.  Then Tom
marked out them things on it with the nail, and set Jim to work on them,
with the nail for a chisel and an iron bolt from the rubbage in the
lean-to for a hammer, and told him to work till the rest of his candle
quit on him, and then he could go to bed, and hide the grindstone under
his straw tick and sleep on it.  Then we helped him fix his chain back
on the bed-leg, and was ready for bed ourselves.  But Tom thought of
something, and says:

“You got any spiders in here, Jim?”

“No, sah, thanks to goodness I hain't, Mars Tom.”

“All right, we'll get you some.”

“But bless you, honey, I doan' _want_ none.  I's afeard un um.  I jis'
's soon have rattlesnakes aroun'.”

Tom thought a minute or two, and says:

“It's a good idea.  And I reckon it's been done.  It _must_ a been done;
it stands to reason.  Yes, it's a prime good idea.  Where could you keep
it?”

“Keep what, Mars Tom?”

“Why, a rattlesnake.”

“De goodness gracious alive, Mars Tom!  Why, if dey was a rattlesnake to
come in heah I'd take en bust right out thoo dat log wall, I would, wid
my head.”

“Why, Jim, you wouldn't be afraid of it after a little.  You could tame
it.”

“_Tame_ it!”

“Yes--easy enough.  Every animal is grateful for kindness and petting,
and they wouldn't _think_ of hurting a person that pets them.  Any book
will tell you that.  You try--that's all I ask; just try for two or three
days. Why, you can get him so, in a little while, that he'll love you;
and sleep with you; and won't stay away from you a minute; and will let
you wrap him round your neck and put his head in your mouth.”

“_Please_, Mars Tom--_doan_' talk so!  I can't _stan_' it!  He'd _let_
me shove his head in my mouf--fer a favor, hain't it?  I lay he'd wait a
pow'ful long time 'fo' I _ast_ him.  En mo' en dat, I doan' _want_ him
to sleep wid me.”

“Jim, don't act so foolish.  A prisoner's _got_ to have some kind of a
dumb pet, and if a rattlesnake hain't ever been tried, why, there's more
glory to be gained in your being the first to ever try it than any other
way you could ever think of to save your life.”

“Why, Mars Tom, I doan' _want_ no sich glory.  Snake take 'n bite
Jim's chin off, den _whah_ is de glory?  No, sah, I doan' want no sich
doin's.”

“Blame it, can't you _try_?  I only _want_ you to try--you needn't keep
it up if it don't work.”

“But de trouble all _done_ ef de snake bite me while I's a tryin' him.
Mars Tom, I's willin' to tackle mos' anything 'at ain't onreasonable,
but ef you en Huck fetches a rattlesnake in heah for me to tame, I's
gwyne to _leave_, dat's _shore_.”

“Well, then, let it go, let it go, if you're so bull-headed about it.
 We can get you some garter-snakes, and you can tie some buttons on
their tails, and let on they're rattlesnakes, and I reckon that 'll have
to do.”

“I k'n stan' _dem_, Mars Tom, but blame' 'f I couldn' get along widout
um, I tell you dat.  I never knowed b'fo' 't was so much bother and
trouble to be a prisoner.”

“Well, it _always_ is when it's done right.  You got any rats around
here?”

“No, sah, I hain't seed none.”

“Well, we'll get you some rats.”

“Why, Mars Tom, I doan' _want_ no rats.  Dey's de dadblamedest creturs
to 'sturb a body, en rustle roun' over 'im, en bite his feet, when he's
tryin' to sleep, I ever see.  No, sah, gimme g'yarter-snakes, 'f I's
got to have 'm, but doan' gimme no rats; I hain' got no use f'r um,
skasely.”

“But, Jim, you _got_ to have 'em--they all do.  So don't make no more
fuss about it.  Prisoners ain't ever without rats.  There ain't no
instance of it.  And they train them, and pet them, and learn them
tricks, and they get to be as sociable as flies.  But you got to play
music to them.  You got anything to play music on?”

“I ain' got nuffn but a coase comb en a piece o' paper, en a juice-harp;
but I reck'n dey wouldn' take no stock in a juice-harp.”

“Yes they would _they_ don't care what kind of music 'tis.  A
jews-harp's plenty good enough for a rat.  All animals like music--in a
prison they dote on it.  Specially, painful music; and you can't get no
other kind out of a jews-harp.  It always interests them; they come out
to see what's the matter with you.  Yes, you're all right; you're fixed
very well.  You want to set on your bed nights before you go to sleep,
and early in the mornings, and play your jews-harp; play 'The Last Link
is Broken'--that's the thing that 'll scoop a rat quicker 'n anything
else; and when you've played about two minutes you'll see all the rats,
and the snakes, and spiders, and things begin to feel worried about you,
and come.  And they'll just fairly swarm over you, and have a noble good
time.”

“Yes, _dey_ will, I reck'n, Mars Tom, but what kine er time is _Jim_
havin'? Blest if I kin see de pint.  But I'll do it ef I got to.  I
reck'n I better keep de animals satisfied, en not have no trouble in de
house.”

Tom waited to think it over, and see if there wasn't nothing else; and
pretty soon he says:

“Oh, there's one thing I forgot.  Could you raise a flower here, do you
reckon?”

“I doan know but maybe I could, Mars Tom; but it's tolable dark in heah,
en I ain' got no use f'r no flower, nohow, en she'd be a pow'ful sight
o' trouble.”

“Well, you try it, anyway.  Some other prisoners has done it.”

“One er dem big cat-tail-lookin' mullen-stalks would grow in heah, Mars
Tom, I reck'n, but she wouldn't be wuth half de trouble she'd coss.”

“Don't you believe it.  We'll fetch you a little one and you plant it in
the corner over there, and raise it.  And don't call it mullen, call it
Pitchiola--that's its right name when it's in a prison.  And you want to
water it with your tears.”

“Why, I got plenty spring water, Mars Tom.”

“You don't _want_ spring water; you want to water it with your tears.
 It's the way they always do.”

“Why, Mars Tom, I lay I kin raise one er dem mullen-stalks twyste wid
spring water whiles another man's a _start'n_ one wid tears.”

“That ain't the idea.  You _got_ to do it with tears.”

“She'll die on my han's, Mars Tom, she sholy will; kase I doan' skasely
ever cry.”

So Tom was stumped.  But he studied it over, and then said Jim would
have to worry along the best he could with an onion.  He promised
he would go to the nigger cabins and drop one, private, in Jim's
coffee-pot, in the morning. Jim said he would “jis' 's soon have
tobacker in his coffee;” and found so much fault with it, and with the
work and bother of raising the mullen, and jews-harping the rats, and
petting and flattering up the snakes and spiders and things, on top of
all the other work he had to do on pens, and inscriptions, and journals,
and things, which made it more trouble and worry and responsibility to
be a prisoner than anything he ever undertook, that Tom most lost all
patience with him; and said he was just loadened down with more gaudier
chances than a prisoner ever had in the world to make a name for
himself, and yet he didn't know enough to appreciate them, and they was
just about wasted on him.  So Jim he was sorry, and said he wouldn't
behave so no more, and then me and Tom shoved for bed.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

IN the morning we went up to the village and bought a wire rat-trap and
fetched it down, and unstopped the best rat-hole, and in about an hour
we had fifteen of the bulliest kind of ones; and then we took it and put
it in a safe place under Aunt Sally's bed.  But while we was gone for
spiders little Thomas Franklin Benjamin Jefferson Elexander Phelps found
it there, and opened the door of it to see if the rats would come out,
and they did; and Aunt Sally she come in, and when we got back she was
a-standing on top of the bed raising Cain, and the rats was doing what
they could to keep off the dull times for her.  So she took and dusted
us both with the hickry, and we was as much as two hours catching
another fifteen or sixteen, drat that meddlesome cub, and they warn't
the likeliest, nuther, because the first haul was the pick of the flock.
 I never see a likelier lot of rats than what that first haul was.

We got a splendid stock of sorted spiders, and bugs, and frogs, and
caterpillars, and one thing or another; and we like to got a hornet's
nest, but we didn't.  The family was at home.  We didn't give it right
up, but stayed with them as long as we could; because we allowed we'd
tire them out or they'd got to tire us out, and they done it.  Then we
got allycumpain and rubbed on the places, and was pretty near all right
again, but couldn't set down convenient.  And so we went for the snakes,
and grabbed a couple of dozen garters and house-snakes, and put them in
a bag, and put it in our room, and by that time it was supper-time, and
a rattling good honest day's work:  and hungry?--oh, no, I reckon not!
 And there warn't a blessed snake up there when we went back--we didn't
half tie the sack, and they worked out somehow, and left.  But it didn't
matter much, because they was still on the premises somewheres.  So
we judged we could get some of them again.  No, there warn't no real
scarcity of snakes about the house for a considerable spell.  You'd see
them dripping from the rafters and places every now and then; and they
generly landed in your plate, or down the back of your neck, and most
of the time where you didn't want them.  Well, they was handsome and
striped, and there warn't no harm in a million of them; but that never
made no difference to Aunt Sally; she despised snakes, be the breed what
they might, and she couldn't stand them no way you could fix it; and
every time one of them flopped down on her, it didn't make no difference
what she was doing, she would just lay that work down and light out.  I
never see such a woman.  And you could hear her whoop to Jericho.  You
couldn't get her to take a-holt of one of them with the tongs.  And if
she turned over and found one in bed she would scramble out and lift a
howl that you would think the house was afire.  She disturbed the old
man so that he said he could most wish there hadn't ever been no snakes
created.  Why, after every last snake had been gone clear out of the
house for as much as a week Aunt Sally warn't over it yet; she warn't
near over it; when she was setting thinking about something you could
touch her on the back of her neck with a feather and she would jump
right out of her stockings.  It was very curious.  But Tom said all
women was just so.  He said they was made that way for some reason or
other.

We got a licking every time one of our snakes come in her way, and she
allowed these lickings warn't nothing to what she would do if we ever
loaded up the place again with them.  I didn't mind the lickings,
because they didn't amount to nothing; but I minded the trouble we
had to lay in another lot.  But we got them laid in, and all the other
things; and you never see a cabin as blithesome as Jim's was when they'd
all swarm out for music and go for him.  Jim didn't like the spiders,
and the spiders didn't like Jim; and so they'd lay for him, and make it
mighty warm for him.  And he said that between the rats and the snakes
and the grindstone there warn't no room in bed for him, skasely; and
when there was, a body couldn't sleep, it was so lively, and it was
always lively, he said, because _they_ never all slept at one time, but
took turn about, so when the snakes was asleep the rats was on deck, and
when the rats turned in the snakes come on watch, so he always had one
gang under him, in his way, and t'other gang having a circus over him,
and if he got up to hunt a new place the spiders would take a chance at
him as he crossed over. He said if he ever got out this time he wouldn't
ever be a prisoner again, not for a salary.

Well, by the end of three weeks everything was in pretty good shape.
 The shirt was sent in early, in a pie, and every time a rat bit Jim he
would get up and write a little in his journal whilst the ink was fresh;
the pens was made, the inscriptions and so on was all carved on the
grindstone; the bed-leg was sawed in two, and we had et up the sawdust,
and it give us a most amazing stomach-ache.  We reckoned we was all
going to die, but didn't.  It was the most undigestible sawdust I ever
see; and Tom said the same.

But as I was saying, we'd got all the work done now, at last; and we was
all pretty much fagged out, too, but mainly Jim.  The old man had wrote
a couple of times to the plantation below Orleans to come and get their
runaway nigger, but hadn't got no answer, because there warn't no such
plantation; so he allowed he would advertise Jim in the St. Louis and
New Orleans papers; and when he mentioned the St. Louis ones it give me
the cold shivers, and I see we hadn't no time to lose. So Tom said, now
for the nonnamous letters.

“What's them?”  I says.

“Warnings to the people that something is up.  Sometimes it's done one
way, sometimes another.  But there's always somebody spying around that
gives notice to the governor of the castle.  When Louis XVI. was going
to light out of the Tooleries, a servant-girl done it.  It's a very good
way, and so is the nonnamous letters.  We'll use them both.  And it's
usual for the prisoner's mother to change clothes with him, and she
stays in, and he slides out in her clothes.  We'll do that, too.”

“But looky here, Tom, what do we want to _warn_ anybody for that
something's up?  Let them find it out for themselves--it's their
lookout.”

“Yes, I know; but you can't depend on them.  It's the way they've acted
from the very start--left us to do _everything_.  They're so confiding
and mullet-headed they don't take notice of nothing at all.  So if we
don't _give_ them notice there won't be nobody nor nothing to interfere
with us, and so after all our hard work and trouble this escape 'll go
off perfectly flat; won't amount to nothing--won't be nothing _to_ it.”

“Well, as for me, Tom, that's the way I'd like.”

“Shucks!” he says, and looked disgusted.  So I says:

“But I ain't going to make no complaint.  Any way that suits you suits
me. What you going to do about the servant-girl?”

“You'll be her.  You slide in, in the middle of the night, and hook that
yaller girl's frock.”

“Why, Tom, that 'll make trouble next morning; because, of course, she
prob'bly hain't got any but that one.”

“I know; but you don't want it but fifteen minutes, to carry the
nonnamous letter and shove it under the front door.”

“All right, then, I'll do it; but I could carry it just as handy in my
own togs.”

“You wouldn't look like a servant-girl _then_, would you?”

“No, but there won't be nobody to see what I look like, _anyway_.”

“That ain't got nothing to do with it.  The thing for us to do is just
to do our _duty_, and not worry about whether anybody _sees_ us do it or
not. Hain't you got no principle at all?”

“All right, I ain't saying nothing; I'm the servant-girl.  Who's Jim's
mother?”

“I'm his mother.  I'll hook a gown from Aunt Sally.”

“Well, then, you'll have to stay in the cabin when me and Jim leaves.”

“Not much.  I'll stuff Jim's clothes full of straw and lay it on his bed
to represent his mother in disguise, and Jim 'll take the nigger woman's
gown off of me and wear it, and we'll all evade together.  When a
prisoner of style escapes it's called an evasion.  It's always called
so when a king escapes, f'rinstance.  And the same with a king's son;
it don't make no difference whether he's a natural one or an unnatural
one.”

So Tom he wrote the nonnamous letter, and I smouched the yaller wench's
frock that night, and put it on, and shoved it under the front door, the
way Tom told me to.  It said:

Beware.  Trouble is brewing.  Keep a sharp lookout. _Unknown_ _Friend_.

Next night we stuck a picture, which Tom drawed in blood, of a skull and
crossbones on the front door; and next night another one of a coffin on
the back door.  I never see a family in such a sweat.  They couldn't a
been worse scared if the place had a been full of ghosts laying for them
behind everything and under the beds and shivering through the air.  If
a door banged, Aunt Sally she jumped and said “ouch!” if anything fell,
she jumped and said “ouch!” if you happened to touch her, when she
warn't noticing, she done the same; she couldn't face noway and be
satisfied, because she allowed there was something behind her every
time--so she was always a-whirling around sudden, and saying “ouch,” and
before she'd got two-thirds around she'd whirl back again, and say it
again; and she was afraid to go to bed, but she dasn't set up.  So the
thing was working very well, Tom said; he said he never see a thing work
more satisfactory. He said it showed it was done right.

So he said, now for the grand bulge!  So the very next morning at the
streak of dawn we got another letter ready, and was wondering what we
better do with it, because we heard them say at supper they was going
to have a nigger on watch at both doors all night.  Tom he went down the
lightning-rod to spy around; and the nigger at the back door was asleep,
and he stuck it in the back of his neck and come back.  This letter
said:

Don't betray me, I wish to be your friend.  There is a desprate gang of
cutthroats from over in the Indian Territory going to steal your runaway
nigger to-night, and they have been trying to scare you so as you will
stay in the house and not bother them.  I am one of the gang, but have
got religgion and wish to quit it and lead an honest life again, and
will betray the helish design. They will sneak down from northards,
along the fence, at midnight exact, with a false key, and go in the
nigger's cabin to get him. I am to be off a piece and blow a tin horn
if I see any danger; but stead of that I will _baa_ like a sheep soon as
they get in and not blow at all; then whilst they are getting his
chains loose, you slip there and lock them in, and can kill them at your
leasure.  Don't do anything but just the way I am telling you, if you do
they will suspicion something and raise whoop-jamboreehoo. I do not wish
any reward but to know I have done the right thing. _Unknown Friend._




CHAPTER XL.

WE was feeling pretty good after breakfast, and took my canoe and went
over the river a-fishing, with a lunch, and had a good time, and took a
look at the raft and found her all right, and got home late to supper,
and found them in such a sweat and worry they didn't know which end they
was standing on, and made us go right off to bed the minute we was done
supper, and wouldn't tell us what the trouble was, and never let on a
word about the new letter, but didn't need to, because we knowed as much
about it as anybody did, and as soon as we was half up stairs and her
back was turned we slid for the cellar cupboard and loaded up a good
lunch and took it up to our room and went to bed, and got up about
half-past eleven, and Tom put on Aunt Sally's dress that he stole and
was going to start with the lunch, but says:

“Where's the butter?”

“I laid out a hunk of it,” I says, “on a piece of a corn-pone.”

“Well, you _left_ it laid out, then--it ain't here.”

“We can get along without it,” I says.

“We can get along _with_ it, too,” he says; “just you slide down cellar
and fetch it.  And then mosey right down the lightning-rod and come
along. I'll go and stuff the straw into Jim's clothes to represent his
mother in disguise, and be ready to _baa_ like a sheep and shove soon as
you get there.”

So out he went, and down cellar went I. The hunk of butter, big as
a person's fist, was where I had left it, so I took up the slab of
corn-pone with it on, and blowed out my light, and started up stairs
very stealthy, and got up to the main floor all right, but here comes
Aunt Sally with a candle, and I clapped the truck in my hat, and clapped
my hat on my head, and the next second she see me; and she says:

“You been down cellar?”

“Yes'm.”

“What you been doing down there?”

“Noth'n.”

“_Noth'n!_”

“No'm.”

“Well, then, what possessed you to go down there this time of night?”

“I don't know 'm.”

“You don't _know_?  Don't answer me that way. Tom, I want to know what
you been _doing_ down there.”

“I hain't been doing a single thing, Aunt Sally, I hope to gracious if I
have.”

I reckoned she'd let me go now, and as a generl thing she would; but I
s'pose there was so many strange things going on she was just in a sweat
about every little thing that warn't yard-stick straight; so she says,
very decided:

“You just march into that setting-room and stay there till I come.  You
been up to something you no business to, and I lay I'll find out what it
is before I'M done with you.”

So she went away as I opened the door and walked into the setting-room.
My, but there was a crowd there!  Fifteen farmers, and every one of them
had a gun.  I was most powerful sick, and slunk to a chair and set down.
They was setting around, some of them talking a little, in a low voice,
and all of them fidgety and uneasy, but trying to look like they warn't;
but I knowed they was, because they was always taking off their hats,
and putting them on, and scratching their heads, and changing their
seats, and fumbling with their buttons.  I warn't easy myself, but I
didn't take my hat off, all the same.

I did wish Aunt Sally would come, and get done with me, and lick me, if
she wanted to, and let me get away and tell Tom how we'd overdone this
thing, and what a thundering hornet's-nest we'd got ourselves into, so
we could stop fooling around straight off, and clear out with Jim before
these rips got out of patience and come for us.

At last she come and begun to ask me questions, but I _couldn't_ answer
them straight, I didn't know which end of me was up; because these men
was in such a fidget now that some was wanting to start right NOW and
lay for them desperadoes, and saying it warn't but a few minutes to
midnight; and others was trying to get them to hold on and wait for the
sheep-signal; and here was Aunty pegging away at the questions, and
me a-shaking all over and ready to sink down in my tracks I was
that scared; and the place getting hotter and hotter, and the butter
beginning to melt and run down my neck and behind my ears; and pretty
soon, when one of them says, “I'M for going and getting in the cabin
_first_ and right _now_, and catching them when they come,” I most
dropped; and a streak of butter come a-trickling down my forehead, and
Aunt Sally she see it, and turns white as a sheet, and says:

“For the land's sake, what _is_ the matter with the child?  He's got the
brain-fever as shore as you're born, and they're oozing out!”

And everybody runs to see, and she snatches off my hat, and out comes
the bread and what was left of the butter, and she grabbed me, and
hugged me, and says:

“Oh, what a turn you did give me! and how glad and grateful I am it
ain't no worse; for luck's against us, and it never rains but it pours,
and when I see that truck I thought we'd lost you, for I knowed by
the color and all it was just like your brains would be if--Dear,
dear, whyd'nt you _tell_ me that was what you'd been down there for, I
wouldn't a cared.  Now cler out to bed, and don't lemme see no more of
you till morning!”

I was up stairs in a second, and down the lightning-rod in another one,
and shinning through the dark for the lean-to.  I couldn't hardly get my
words out, I was so anxious; but I told Tom as quick as I could we must
jump for it now, and not a minute to lose--the house full of men, yonder,
with guns!

His eyes just blazed; and he says:

“No!--is that so?  _ain't_ it bully!  Why, Huck, if it was to do over
again, I bet I could fetch two hundred!  If we could put it off till--”

“Hurry!  _Hurry_!”  I says.  “Where's Jim?”

“Right at your elbow; if you reach out your arm you can touch him.
 He's dressed, and everything's ready.  Now we'll slide out and give the
sheep-signal.”

But then we heard the tramp of men coming to the door, and heard them
begin to fumble with the pad-lock, and heard a man say:

“I _told_ you we'd be too soon; they haven't come--the door is locked.
Here, I'll lock some of you into the cabin, and you lay for 'em in the
dark and kill 'em when they come; and the rest scatter around a piece,
and listen if you can hear 'em coming.”

So in they come, but couldn't see us in the dark, and most trod on
us whilst we was hustling to get under the bed.  But we got under all
right, and out through the hole, swift but soft--Jim first, me next,
and Tom last, which was according to Tom's orders.  Now we was in the
lean-to, and heard trampings close by outside.  So we crept to the door,
and Tom stopped us there and put his eye to the crack, but couldn't make
out nothing, it was so dark; and whispered and said he would listen
for the steps to get further, and when he nudged us Jim must glide out
first, and him last.  So he set his ear to the crack and listened, and
listened, and listened, and the steps a-scraping around out there all
the time; and at last he nudged us, and we slid out, and stooped down,
not breathing, and not making the least noise, and slipped stealthy
towards the fence in Injun file, and got to it all right, and me and Jim
over it; but Tom's britches catched fast on a splinter on the top
rail, and then he hear the steps coming, so he had to pull loose, which
snapped the splinter and made a noise; and as he dropped in our tracks
and started somebody sings out:

“Who's that?  Answer, or I'll shoot!”

But we didn't answer; we just unfurled our heels and shoved.  Then there
was a rush, and a _Bang, Bang, Bang!_ and the bullets fairly whizzed
around us! We heard them sing out:

“Here they are!  They've broke for the river!  After 'em, boys, and turn
loose the dogs!”

So here they come, full tilt.  We could hear them because they wore
boots and yelled, but we didn't wear no boots and didn't yell.  We was
in the path to the mill; and when they got pretty close on to us we
dodged into the bush and let them go by, and then dropped in behind
them.  They'd had all the dogs shut up, so they wouldn't scare off the
robbers; but by this time somebody had let them loose, and here they
come, making powwow enough for a million; but they was our dogs; so we
stopped in our tracks till they catched up; and when they see it warn't
nobody but us, and no excitement to offer them, they only just said
howdy, and tore right ahead towards the shouting and clattering; and
then we up-steam again, and whizzed along after them till we was nearly
to the mill, and then struck up through the bush to where my canoe was
tied, and hopped in and pulled for dear life towards the middle of the
river, but didn't make no more noise than we was obleeged to. Then we
struck out, easy and comfortable, for the island where my raft was; and
we could hear them yelling and barking at each other all up and down the
bank, till we was so far away the sounds got dim and died out.  And when
we stepped on to the raft I says:

“_Now_, old Jim, you're a free man again, and I bet you won't ever be a
slave no more.”

“En a mighty good job it wuz, too, Huck.  It 'uz planned beautiful, en
it 'uz done beautiful; en dey ain't _nobody_ kin git up a plan dat's mo'
mixed-up en splendid den what dat one wuz.”

We was all glad as we could be, but Tom was the gladdest of all because
he had a bullet in the calf of his leg.

When me and Jim heard that we didn't feel so brash as what we did
before. It was hurting him considerable, and bleeding; so we laid him in
the wigwam and tore up one of the duke's shirts for to bandage him, but
he says:

“Gimme the rags; I can do it myself.  Don't stop now; don't fool around
here, and the evasion booming along so handsome; man the sweeps, and set
her loose!  Boys, we done it elegant!--'deed we did.  I wish _we'd_ a
had the handling of Louis XVI., there wouldn't a been no 'Son of Saint
Louis, ascend to heaven!' wrote down in _his_ biography; no, sir, we'd
a whooped him over the _border_--that's what we'd a done with _him_--and
done it just as slick as nothing at all, too.  Man the sweeps--man the
sweeps!”

But me and Jim was consulting--and thinking.  And after we'd thought a
minute, I says:

“Say it, Jim.”

So he says:

“Well, den, dis is de way it look to me, Huck.  Ef it wuz _him_ dat 'uz
bein' sot free, en one er de boys wuz to git shot, would he say, 'Go on
en save me, nemmine 'bout a doctor f'r to save dis one?'  Is dat like
Mars Tom Sawyer?  Would he say dat?  You _bet_ he wouldn't!  _well_,
den, is _Jim_ gywne to say it?  No, sah--I doan' budge a step out'n dis
place 'dout a _doctor_, not if it's forty year!”

I knowed he was white inside, and I reckoned he'd say what he did say--so
it was all right now, and I told Tom I was a-going for a doctor.
 He raised considerable row about it, but me and Jim stuck to it and
wouldn't budge; so he was for crawling out and setting the raft loose
himself; but we wouldn't let him.  Then he give us a piece of his mind,
but it didn't do no good.

So when he sees me getting the canoe ready, he says:

“Well, then, if you're bound to go, I'll tell you the way to do when you
get to the village.  Shut the door and blindfold the doctor tight and
fast, and make him swear to be silent as the grave, and put a purse
full of gold in his hand, and then take and lead him all around the
back alleys and everywheres in the dark, and then fetch him here in the
canoe, in a roundabout way amongst the islands, and search him and take
his chalk away from him, and don't give it back to him till you get him
back to the village, or else he will chalk this raft so he can find it
again. It's the way they all do.”

So I said I would, and left, and Jim was to hide in the woods when he
see the doctor coming till he was gone again.




CHAPTER XLI.

THE doctor was an old man; a very nice, kind-looking old man when I got
him up.  I told him me and my brother was over on Spanish Island hunting
yesterday afternoon, and camped on a piece of a raft we found, and about
midnight he must a kicked his gun in his dreams, for it went off and
shot him in the leg, and we wanted him to go over there and fix it and
not say nothing about it, nor let anybody know, because we wanted to
come home this evening and surprise the folks.

“Who is your folks?” he says.

“The Phelpses, down yonder.”

“Oh,” he says.  And after a minute, he says:

“How'd you say he got shot?”

“He had a dream,” I says, “and it shot him.”

“Singular dream,” he says.

So he lit up his lantern, and got his saddle-bags, and we started.  But
when he sees the canoe he didn't like the look of her--said she was big
enough for one, but didn't look pretty safe for two.  I says:

“Oh, you needn't be afeard, sir, she carried the three of us easy
enough.”

“What three?”

“Why, me and Sid, and--and--and _the guns_; that's what I mean.”

“Oh,” he says.

But he put his foot on the gunnel and rocked her, and shook his head,
and said he reckoned he'd look around for a bigger one.  But they was
all locked and chained; so he took my canoe, and said for me to wait
till he come back, or I could hunt around further, or maybe I better
go down home and get them ready for the surprise if I wanted to.  But
I said I didn't; so I told him just how to find the raft, and then he
started.

I struck an idea pretty soon.  I says to myself, spos'n he can't fix
that leg just in three shakes of a sheep's tail, as the saying is?
spos'n it takes him three or four days?  What are we going to do?--lay
around there till he lets the cat out of the bag?  No, sir; I know what
_I'll_ do.  I'll wait, and when he comes back if he says he's got to
go any more I'll get down there, too, if I swim; and we'll take and tie
him, and keep him, and shove out down the river; and when Tom's done
with him we'll give him what it's worth, or all we got, and then let him
get ashore.

So then I crept into a lumber-pile to get some sleep; and next time I
waked up the sun was away up over my head!  I shot out and went for the
doctor's house, but they told me he'd gone away in the night some time
or other, and warn't back yet.  Well, thinks I, that looks powerful bad
for Tom, and I'll dig out for the island right off.  So away I shoved,
and turned the corner, and nearly rammed my head into Uncle Silas's
stomach! He says:

“Why, _Tom!_  Where you been all this time, you rascal?”

“I hain't been nowheres,” I says, “only just hunting for the runaway
nigger--me and Sid.”

“Why, where ever did you go?” he says.  “Your aunt's been mighty
uneasy.”

“She needn't,” I says, “because we was all right.  We followed the men
and the dogs, but they outrun us, and we lost them; but we thought we
heard them on the water, so we got a canoe and took out after them and
crossed over, but couldn't find nothing of them; so we cruised along
up-shore till we got kind of tired and beat out; and tied up the canoe
and went to sleep, and never waked up till about an hour ago; then we
paddled over here to hear the news, and Sid's at the post-office to see
what he can hear, and I'm a-branching out to get something to eat for
us, and then we're going home.”

So then we went to the post-office to get “Sid”; but just as I
suspicioned, he warn't there; so the old man he got a letter out of the
office, and we waited awhile longer, but Sid didn't come; so the old man
said, come along, let Sid foot it home, or canoe it, when he got done
fooling around--but we would ride.  I couldn't get him to let me stay
and wait for Sid; and he said there warn't no use in it, and I must come
along, and let Aunt Sally see we was all right.

When we got home Aunt Sally was that glad to see me she laughed and
cried both, and hugged me, and give me one of them lickings of hern that
don't amount to shucks, and said she'd serve Sid the same when he come.

And the place was plum full of farmers and farmers' wives, to dinner;
and such another clack a body never heard.  Old Mrs. Hotchkiss was the
worst; her tongue was a-going all the time.  She says:

“Well, Sister Phelps, I've ransacked that-air cabin over, an' I b'lieve
the nigger was crazy.  I says to Sister Damrell--didn't I, Sister
Damrell?--s'I, he's crazy, s'I--them's the very words I said.  You all
hearn me: he's crazy, s'I; everything shows it, s'I.  Look at that-air
grindstone, s'I; want to tell _me_'t any cretur 't's in his right mind
's a goin' to scrabble all them crazy things onto a grindstone, s'I?
 Here sich 'n' sich a person busted his heart; 'n' here so 'n' so
pegged along for thirty-seven year, 'n' all that--natcherl son o' Louis
somebody, 'n' sich everlast'n rubbage.  He's plumb crazy, s'I; it's what
I says in the fust place, it's what I says in the middle, 'n' it's what
I says last 'n' all the time--the nigger's crazy--crazy 's Nebokoodneezer,
s'I.”

“An' look at that-air ladder made out'n rags, Sister Hotchkiss,” says
old Mrs. Damrell; “what in the name o' goodness _could_ he ever want
of--”

“The very words I was a-sayin' no longer ago th'n this minute to Sister
Utterback, 'n' she'll tell you so herself.  Sh-she, look at that-air rag
ladder, sh-she; 'n' s'I, yes, _look_ at it, s'I--what _could_ he a-wanted
of it, s'I.  Sh-she, Sister Hotchkiss, sh-she--”

“But how in the nation'd they ever _git_ that grindstone _in_ there,
_anyway_? 'n' who dug that-air _hole_? 'n' who--”

“My very _words_, Brer Penrod!  I was a-sayin'--pass that-air sasser o'
m'lasses, won't ye?--I was a-sayin' to Sister Dunlap, jist this minute,
how _did_ they git that grindstone in there, s'I.  Without _help_, mind
you--'thout _help_!  _that's_ wher 'tis.  Don't tell _me_, s'I; there
_wuz_ help, s'I; 'n' ther' wuz a _plenty_ help, too, s'I; ther's ben a
_dozen_ a-helpin' that nigger, 'n' I lay I'd skin every last nigger on
this place but _I'd_ find out who done it, s'I; 'n' moreover, s'I--”

“A _dozen_ says you!--_forty_ couldn't a done every thing that's been
done. Look at them case-knife saws and things, how tedious they've been
made; look at that bed-leg sawed off with 'm, a week's work for six men;
look at that nigger made out'n straw on the bed; and look at--”

“You may _well_ say it, Brer Hightower!  It's jist as I was a-sayin'
to Brer Phelps, his own self.  S'e, what do _you_ think of it, Sister
Hotchkiss, s'e? Think o' what, Brer Phelps, s'I?  Think o' that bed-leg
sawed off that a way, s'e?  _think_ of it, s'I?  I lay it never sawed
_itself_ off, s'I--somebody _sawed_ it, s'I; that's my opinion, take it
or leave it, it mayn't be no 'count, s'I, but sich as 't is, it's my
opinion, s'I, 'n' if any body k'n start a better one, s'I, let him _do_
it, s'I, that's all.  I says to Sister Dunlap, s'I--”

“Why, dog my cats, they must a ben a house-full o' niggers in there
every night for four weeks to a done all that work, Sister Phelps.  Look
at that shirt--every last inch of it kivered over with secret African
writ'n done with blood!  Must a ben a raft uv 'm at it right along, all
the time, amost.  Why, I'd give two dollars to have it read to me; 'n'
as for the niggers that wrote it, I 'low I'd take 'n' lash 'm t'll--”

“People to _help_ him, Brother Marples!  Well, I reckon you'd _think_
so if you'd a been in this house for a while back.  Why, they've stole
everything they could lay their hands on--and we a-watching all the time,
mind you. They stole that shirt right off o' the line! and as for that
sheet they made the rag ladder out of, ther' ain't no telling how
many times they _didn't_ steal that; and flour, and candles, and
candlesticks, and spoons, and the old warming-pan, and most a thousand
things that I disremember now, and my new calico dress; and me and
Silas and my Sid and Tom on the constant watch day _and_ night, as I was
a-telling you, and not a one of us could catch hide nor hair nor sight
nor sound of them; and here at the last minute, lo and behold you, they
slides right in under our noses and fools us, and not only fools _us_
but the Injun Territory robbers too, and actuly gets _away_ with that
nigger safe and sound, and that with sixteen men and twenty-two dogs
right on their very heels at that very time!  I tell you, it just bangs
anything I ever _heard_ of. Why, _sperits_ couldn't a done better and
been no smarter. And I reckon they must a _been_ sperits--because, _you_
know our dogs, and ther' ain't no better; well, them dogs never even got
on the _track_ of 'm once!  You explain _that_ to me if you can!--_any_
of you!”

“Well, it does beat--”

“Laws alive, I never--”

“So help me, I wouldn't a be--”

“_House_-thieves as well as--”

“Goodnessgracioussakes, I'd a ben afeard to live in sich a--”

“'Fraid to _live_!--why, I was that scared I dasn't hardly go to bed, or
get up, or lay down, or _set_ down, Sister Ridgeway.  Why, they'd steal
the very--why, goodness sakes, you can guess what kind of a fluster I was
in by the time midnight come last night.  I hope to gracious if I warn't
afraid they'd steal some o' the family!  I was just to that pass I
didn't have no reasoning faculties no more.  It looks foolish enough
_now_, in the daytime; but I says to myself, there's my two poor boys
asleep, 'way up stairs in that lonesome room, and I declare to goodness
I was that uneasy 't I crep' up there and locked 'em in!  I _did_.  And
anybody would. Because, you know, when you get scared that way, and it
keeps running on, and getting worse and worse all the time, and your
wits gets to addling, and you get to doing all sorts o' wild things,
and by and by you think to yourself, spos'n I was a boy, and was away up
there, and the door ain't locked, and you--” She stopped, looking kind
of wondering, and then she turned her head around slow, and when her eye
lit on me--I got up and took a walk.

Says I to myself, I can explain better how we come to not be in that
room this morning if I go out to one side and study over it a little.
 So I done it.  But I dasn't go fur, or she'd a sent for me.  And when
it was late in the day the people all went, and then I come in and
told her the noise and shooting waked up me and “Sid,” and the door was
locked, and we wanted to see the fun, so we went down the lightning-rod,
and both of us got hurt a little, and we didn't never want to try _that_
no more.  And then I went on and told her all what I told Uncle Silas
before; and then she said she'd forgive us, and maybe it was all right
enough anyway, and about what a body might expect of boys, for all boys
was a pretty harum-scarum lot as fur as she could see; and so, as long
as no harm hadn't come of it, she judged she better put in her time
being grateful we was alive and well and she had us still, stead of
fretting over what was past and done.  So then she kissed me, and patted
me on the head, and dropped into a kind of a brown study; and pretty
soon jumps up, and says:

“Why, lawsamercy, it's most night, and Sid not come yet!  What _has_
become of that boy?”

I see my chance; so I skips up and says:

“I'll run right up to town and get him,” I says.

“No you won't,” she says.  “You'll stay right wher' you are; _one's_
enough to be lost at a time.  If he ain't here to supper, your uncle 'll
go.”

Well, he warn't there to supper; so right after supper uncle went.

He come back about ten a little bit uneasy; hadn't run across Tom's
track. Aunt Sally was a good _deal_ uneasy; but Uncle Silas he said
there warn't no occasion to be--boys will be boys, he said, and you'll
see this one turn up in the morning all sound and right.  So she had
to be satisfied.  But she said she'd set up for him a while anyway, and
keep a light burning so he could see it.

And then when I went up to bed she come up with me and fetched her
candle, and tucked me in, and mothered me so good I felt mean, and like
I couldn't look her in the face; and she set down on the bed and talked
with me a long time, and said what a splendid boy Sid was, and didn't
seem to want to ever stop talking about him; and kept asking me every
now and then if I reckoned he could a got lost, or hurt, or maybe
drownded, and might be laying at this minute somewheres suffering or
dead, and she not by him to help him, and so the tears would drip down
silent, and I would tell her that Sid was all right, and would be home
in the morning, sure; and she would squeeze my hand, or maybe kiss me,
and tell me to say it again, and keep on saying it, because it done her
good, and she was in so much trouble.  And when she was going away she
looked down in my eyes so steady and gentle, and says:

“The door ain't going to be locked, Tom, and there's the window and
the rod; but you'll be good, _won't_ you?  And you won't go?  For _my_
sake.”

Laws knows I _wanted_ to go bad enough to see about Tom, and was all
intending to go; but after that I wouldn't a went, not for kingdoms.

But she was on my mind and Tom was on my mind, so I slept very restless.
And twice I went down the rod away in the night, and slipped around
front, and see her setting there by her candle in the window with her
eyes towards the road and the tears in them; and I wished I could do
something for her, but I couldn't, only to swear that I wouldn't never
do nothing to grieve her any more.  And the third time I waked up at
dawn, and slid down, and she was there yet, and her candle was most out,
and her old gray head was resting on her hand, and she was asleep.




CHAPTER XLII.

THE old man was uptown again before breakfast, but couldn't get no
track of Tom; and both of them set at the table thinking, and not saying
nothing, and looking mournful, and their coffee getting cold, and not
eating anything. And by and by the old man says:

“Did I give you the letter?”

“What letter?”

“The one I got yesterday out of the post-office.”

“No, you didn't give me no letter.”

“Well, I must a forgot it.”

So he rummaged his pockets, and then went off somewheres where he had
laid it down, and fetched it, and give it to her.  She says:

“Why, it's from St. Petersburg--it's from Sis.”

I allowed another walk would do me good; but I couldn't stir.  But
before she could break it open she dropped it and run--for she see
something. And so did I. It was Tom Sawyer on a mattress; and that old
doctor; and Jim, in _her_ calico dress, with his hands tied behind him;
and a lot of people.  I hid the letter behind the first thing that come
handy, and rushed.  She flung herself at Tom, crying, and says:

“Oh, he's dead, he's dead, I know he's dead!”

And Tom he turned his head a little, and muttered something or other,
which showed he warn't in his right mind; then she flung up her hands,
and says:

“He's alive, thank God!  And that's enough!” and she snatched a kiss of
him, and flew for the house to get the bed ready, and scattering orders
right and left at the niggers and everybody else, as fast as her tongue
could go, every jump of the way.

I followed the men to see what they was going to do with Jim; and the
old doctor and Uncle Silas followed after Tom into the house.  The men
was very huffy, and some of them wanted to hang Jim for an example to
all the other niggers around there, so they wouldn't be trying to run
away like Jim done, and making such a raft of trouble, and keeping a
whole family scared most to death for days and nights.  But the others
said, don't do it, it wouldn't answer at all; he ain't our nigger, and
his owner would turn up and make us pay for him, sure.  So that cooled
them down a little, because the people that's always the most anxious
for to hang a nigger that hain't done just right is always the very
ones that ain't the most anxious to pay for him when they've got their
satisfaction out of him.

They cussed Jim considerble, though, and give him a cuff or two side the
head once in a while, but Jim never said nothing, and he never let on to
know me, and they took him to the same cabin, and put his own clothes
on him, and chained him again, and not to no bed-leg this time, but to
a big staple drove into the bottom log, and chained his hands, too, and
both legs, and said he warn't to have nothing but bread and water to
eat after this till his owner come, or he was sold at auction because
he didn't come in a certain length of time, and filled up our hole, and
said a couple of farmers with guns must stand watch around about the
cabin every night, and a bulldog tied to the door in the daytime; and
about this time they was through with the job and was tapering off with
a kind of generl good-bye cussing, and then the old doctor comes and
takes a look, and says:

“Don't be no rougher on him than you're obleeged to, because he ain't
a bad nigger.  When I got to where I found the boy I see I couldn't cut
the bullet out without some help, and he warn't in no condition for
me to leave to go and get help; and he got a little worse and a little
worse, and after a long time he went out of his head, and wouldn't let
me come a-nigh him any more, and said if I chalked his raft he'd kill
me, and no end of wild foolishness like that, and I see I couldn't do
anything at all with him; so I says, I got to have _help_ somehow; and
the minute I says it out crawls this nigger from somewheres and says
he'll help, and he done it, too, and done it very well.  Of course I
judged he must be a runaway nigger, and there I _was_! and there I had
to stick right straight along all the rest of the day and all night.  It
was a fix, I tell you! I had a couple of patients with the chills, and
of course I'd of liked to run up to town and see them, but I dasn't,
because the nigger might get away, and then I'd be to blame; and yet
never a skiff come close enough for me to hail.  So there I had to stick
plumb until daylight this morning; and I never see a nigger that was a
better nuss or faithfuller, and yet he was risking his freedom to do it,
and was all tired out, too, and I see plain enough he'd been worked
main hard lately.  I liked the nigger for that; I tell you, gentlemen, a
nigger like that is worth a thousand dollars--and kind treatment, too.  I
had everything I needed, and the boy was doing as well there as he
would a done at home--better, maybe, because it was so quiet; but there I
_was_, with both of 'm on my hands, and there I had to stick till about
dawn this morning; then some men in a skiff come by, and as good luck
would have it the nigger was setting by the pallet with his head propped
on his knees sound asleep; so I motioned them in quiet, and they slipped
up on him and grabbed him and tied him before he knowed what he was
about, and we never had no trouble. And the boy being in a kind of a
flighty sleep, too, we muffled the oars and hitched the raft on, and
towed her over very nice and quiet, and the nigger never made the least
row nor said a word from the start.  He ain't no bad nigger, gentlemen;
that's what I think about him.”

Somebody says:

“Well, it sounds very good, doctor, I'm obleeged to say.”

Then the others softened up a little, too, and I was mighty thankful
to that old doctor for doing Jim that good turn; and I was glad it was
according to my judgment of him, too; because I thought he had a good
heart in him and was a good man the first time I see him.  Then they
all agreed that Jim had acted very well, and was deserving to have some
notice took of it, and reward.  So every one of them promised, right out
and hearty, that they wouldn't cuss him no more.

Then they come out and locked him up.  I hoped they was going to say he
could have one or two of the chains took off, because they was rotten
heavy, or could have meat and greens with his bread and water; but they
didn't think of it, and I reckoned it warn't best for me to mix in, but
I judged I'd get the doctor's yarn to Aunt Sally somehow or other as
soon as I'd got through the breakers that was laying just ahead of
me--explanations, I mean, of how I forgot to mention about Sid being shot
when I was telling how him and me put in that dratted night paddling
around hunting the runaway nigger.

But I had plenty time.  Aunt Sally she stuck to the sick-room all day
and all night, and every time I see Uncle Silas mooning around I dodged
him.

Next morning I heard Tom was a good deal better, and they said Aunt
Sally was gone to get a nap.  So I slips to the sick-room, and if I
found him awake I reckoned we could put up a yarn for the family that
would wash. But he was sleeping, and sleeping very peaceful, too; and
pale, not fire-faced the way he was when he come.  So I set down and
laid for him to wake.  In about half an hour Aunt Sally comes gliding
in, and there I was, up a stump again!  She motioned me to be still, and
set down by me, and begun to whisper, and said we could all be joyful
now, because all the symptoms was first-rate, and he'd been sleeping
like that for ever so long, and looking better and peacefuller all the
time, and ten to one he'd wake up in his right mind.

So we set there watching, and by and by he stirs a bit, and opened his
eyes very natural, and takes a look, and says:

“Hello!--why, I'm at _home_!  How's that?  Where's the raft?”

“It's all right,” I says.

“And _Jim_?”

“The same,” I says, but couldn't say it pretty brash.  But he never
noticed, but says:

“Good!  Splendid!  _Now_ we're all right and safe! Did you tell Aunty?”

I was going to say yes; but she chipped in and says:  “About what, Sid?”

“Why, about the way the whole thing was done.”

“What whole thing?”

“Why, _the_ whole thing.  There ain't but one; how we set the runaway
nigger free--me and Tom.”

“Good land!  Set the run--What _is_ the child talking about!  Dear, dear,
out of his head again!”

“_No_, I ain't out of my _head_; I know all what I'm talking about.  We
_did_ set him free--me and Tom.  We laid out to do it, and we _done_ it.
 And we done it elegant, too.”  He'd got a start, and she never checked
him up, just set and stared and stared, and let him clip along, and
I see it warn't no use for _me_ to put in.  “Why, Aunty, it cost us a
power of work--weeks of it--hours and hours, every night, whilst you was
all asleep. And we had to steal candles, and the sheet, and the shirt,
and your dress, and spoons, and tin plates, and case-knives, and the
warming-pan, and the grindstone, and flour, and just no end of things,
and you can't think what work it was to make the saws, and pens, and
inscriptions, and one thing or another, and you can't think _half_ the
fun it was.  And we had to make up the pictures of coffins and things,
and nonnamous letters from the robbers, and get up and down the
lightning-rod, and dig the hole into the cabin, and made the rope ladder
and send it in cooked up in a pie, and send in spoons and things to work
with in your apron pocket--”

“Mercy sakes!”

“--and load up the cabin with rats and snakes and so on, for company for
Jim; and then you kept Tom here so long with the butter in his hat that
you come near spiling the whole business, because the men come before
we was out of the cabin, and we had to rush, and they heard us and let
drive at us, and I got my share, and we dodged out of the path and let
them go by, and when the dogs come they warn't interested in us, but
went for the most noise, and we got our canoe, and made for the
raft, and was all safe, and Jim was a free man, and we done it all by
ourselves, and _wasn't_ it bully, Aunty!”

“Well, I never heard the likes of it in all my born days!  So it was
_you_, you little rapscallions, that's been making all this trouble,
and turned everybody's wits clean inside out and scared us all most to
death.  I've as good a notion as ever I had in my life to take it out
o' you this very minute.  To think, here I've been, night after night,
a--_you_ just get well once, you young scamp, and I lay I'll tan the Old
Harry out o' both o' ye!”

But Tom, he _was_ so proud and joyful, he just _couldn't_ hold in,
and his tongue just _went_ it--she a-chipping in, and spitting fire all
along, and both of them going it at once, like a cat convention; and she
says:

“_Well_, you get all the enjoyment you can out of it _now_, for mind I
tell you if I catch you meddling with him again--”

“Meddling with _who_?”  Tom says, dropping his smile and looking
surprised.

“With _who_?  Why, the runaway nigger, of course.  Who'd you reckon?”

Tom looks at me very grave, and says:

“Tom, didn't you just tell me he was all right?  Hasn't he got away?”

“_Him_?” says Aunt Sally; “the runaway nigger?  'Deed he hasn't.
 They've got him back, safe and sound, and he's in that cabin again,
on bread and water, and loaded down with chains, till he's claimed or
sold!”

Tom rose square up in bed, with his eye hot, and his nostrils opening
and shutting like gills, and sings out to me:

“They hain't no _right_ to shut him up!  SHOVE!--and don't you lose a
minute.  Turn him loose! he ain't no slave; he's as free as any cretur
that walks this earth!”

“What _does_ the child mean?”

“I mean every word I _say_, Aunt Sally, and if somebody don't go, _I'll_
go. I've knowed him all his life, and so has Tom, there.  Old Miss
Watson died two months ago, and she was ashamed she ever was going to
sell him down the river, and _said_ so; and she set him free in her
will.”

“Then what on earth did _you_ want to set him free for, seeing he was
already free?”

“Well, that _is_ a question, I must say; and just like women!  Why,
I wanted the _adventure_ of it; and I'd a waded neck-deep in blood
to--goodness alive, _Aunt Polly!_”

If she warn't standing right there, just inside the door, looking as
sweet and contented as an angel half full of pie, I wish I may never!

Aunt Sally jumped for her, and most hugged the head off of her, and
cried over her, and I found a good enough place for me under the bed,
for it was getting pretty sultry for us, seemed to me.  And I peeped
out, and in a little while Tom's Aunt Polly shook herself loose and
stood there looking across at Tom over her spectacles--kind of grinding
him into the earth, you know.  And then she says:

“Yes, you _better_ turn y'r head away--I would if I was you, Tom.”

“Oh, deary me!” says Aunt Sally; “_Is_ he changed so?  Why, that ain't
_Tom_, it's Sid; Tom's--Tom's--why, where is Tom?  He was here a minute
ago.”

“You mean where's Huck _Finn_--that's what you mean!  I reckon I hain't
raised such a scamp as my Tom all these years not to know him when I
_see_ him.  That _would_ be a pretty howdy-do. Come out from under that
bed, Huck Finn.”

So I done it.  But not feeling brash.

Aunt Sally she was one of the mixed-upest-looking persons I ever
see--except one, and that was Uncle Silas, when he come in and they told
it all to him.  It kind of made him drunk, as you may say, and he didn't
know nothing at all the rest of the day, and preached a prayer-meeting
sermon that night that gave him a rattling ruputation, because the
oldest man in the world couldn't a understood it.  So Tom's Aunt Polly,
she told all about who I was, and what; and I had to up and tell how
I was in such a tight place that when Mrs. Phelps took me for Tom
Sawyer--she chipped in and says, “Oh, go on and call me Aunt Sally, I'm
used to it now, and 'tain't no need to change”--that when Aunt Sally took
me for Tom Sawyer I had to stand it--there warn't no other way, and
I knowed he wouldn't mind, because it would be nuts for him, being
a mystery, and he'd make an adventure out of it, and be perfectly
satisfied.  And so it turned out, and he let on to be Sid, and made
things as soft as he could for me.

And his Aunt Polly she said Tom was right about old Miss Watson setting
Jim free in her will; and so, sure enough, Tom Sawyer had gone and took
all that trouble and bother to set a free nigger free! and I couldn't
ever understand before, until that minute and that talk, how he _could_
help a body set a nigger free with his bringing-up.

Well, Aunt Polly she said that when Aunt Sally wrote to her that Tom and
_Sid_ had come all right and safe, she says to herself:

“Look at that, now!  I might have expected it, letting him go off that
way without anybody to watch him.  So now I got to go and trapse all
the way down the river, eleven hundred mile, and find out what that
creetur's up to _this_ time, as long as I couldn't seem to get any
answer out of you about it.”

“Why, I never heard nothing from you,” says Aunt Sally.

“Well, I wonder!  Why, I wrote you twice to ask you what you could mean
by Sid being here.”

“Well, I never got 'em, Sis.”

Aunt Polly she turns around slow and severe, and says:

“You, Tom!”

“Well--_what_?” he says, kind of pettish.

“Don't you what _me_, you impudent thing--hand out them letters.”

“What letters?”

“_Them_ letters.  I be bound, if I have to take a-holt of you I'll--”

“They're in the trunk.  There, now.  And they're just the same as they
was when I got them out of the office.  I hain't looked into them, I
hain't touched them.  But I knowed they'd make trouble, and I thought if
you warn't in no hurry, I'd--”

“Well, you _do_ need skinning, there ain't no mistake about it.  And I
wrote another one to tell you I was coming; and I s'pose he--”

“No, it come yesterday; I hain't read it yet, but _it's_ all right, I've
got that one.”

I wanted to offer to bet two dollars she hadn't, but I reckoned maybe it
was just as safe to not to.  So I never said nothing.




CHAPTER THE LAST

THE first time I catched Tom private I asked him what was his idea, time
of the evasion?--what it was he'd planned to do if the evasion worked all
right and he managed to set a nigger free that was already free before?
And he said, what he had planned in his head from the start, if we got
Jim out all safe, was for us to run him down the river on the raft, and
have adventures plumb to the mouth of the river, and then tell him about
his being free, and take him back up home on a steamboat, in style,
and pay him for his lost time, and write word ahead and get out all
the niggers around, and have them waltz him into town with a torchlight
procession and a brass-band, and then he would be a hero, and so would
we.  But I reckoned it was about as well the way it was.

We had Jim out of the chains in no time, and when Aunt Polly and Uncle
Silas and Aunt Sally found out how good he helped the doctor nurse Tom,
they made a heap of fuss over him, and fixed him up prime, and give him
all he wanted to eat, and a good time, and nothing to do.  And we had
him up to the sick-room, and had a high talk; and Tom give Jim forty
dollars for being prisoner for us so patient, and doing it up so good,
and Jim was pleased most to death, and busted out, and says:

“Dah, now, Huck, what I tell you?--what I tell you up dah on Jackson
islan'?  I _tole_ you I got a hairy breas', en what's de sign un it; en
I _tole_ you I ben rich wunst, en gwineter to be rich _agin_; en it's
come true; en heah she is!  _dah_, now! doan' talk to _me_--signs is
_signs_, mine I tell you; en I knowed jis' 's well 'at I 'uz gwineter be
rich agin as I's a-stannin' heah dis minute!”

And then Tom he talked along and talked along, and says, le's all three
slide out of here one of these nights and get an outfit, and go for
howling adventures amongst the Injuns, over in the Territory, for a
couple of weeks or two; and I says, all right, that suits me, but I
ain't got no money for to buy the outfit, and I reckon I couldn't get
none from home, because it's likely pap's been back before now, and got
it all away from Judge Thatcher and drunk it up.

“No, he hain't,” Tom says; “it's all there yet--six thousand dollars
and more; and your pap hain't ever been back since.  Hadn't when I come
away, anyhow.”

Jim says, kind of solemn:

“He ain't a-comin' back no mo', Huck.”

I says:

“Why, Jim?”

“Nemmine why, Huck--but he ain't comin' back no mo.”

But I kept at him; so at last he says:

“Doan' you 'member de house dat was float'n down de river, en dey wuz a
man in dah, kivered up, en I went in en unkivered him and didn' let you
come in?  Well, den, you kin git yo' money when you wants it, kase dat
wuz him.”

Tom's most well now, and got his bullet around his neck on a watch-guard
for a watch, and is always seeing what time it is, and so there ain't
nothing more to write about, and I am rotten glad of it, because if I'd
a knowed what a trouble it was to make a book I wouldn't a tackled it,
and ain't a-going to no more.  But I reckon I got to light out for the
Territory ahead of the rest, because Aunt Sally she's going to adopt me
and sivilize me, and I can't stand it.  I been there before.

THE END. YOURS TRULY, _HUCK FINN_.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,
Complete, by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HUCKLEBERRY FINN ***

***** This file should be named 76-0.htm or 76-0.zip ***** This and
all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/7/76/

Produced by David Widger. Previous editions produced by Ron Burkey and
Internet Wiretap

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in
the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the
PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You
may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public
domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU
DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree
to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used
on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree
to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that
you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without
complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C
below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help
preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in
the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you
are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent
you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached
full Project Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with
others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing
or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use
it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with
the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work,
you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through
1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute
this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other
than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.net), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full
Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access
to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method you
already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the
owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has agreed to donate
royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each
date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your
periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such
and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you
in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not
agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm License. You
must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works
possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access
to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth
in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the
owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as
set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect
in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written
explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received
the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your
written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the
defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation,
the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number
is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887,
email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page
at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information: Dr. Gregory B. Newby Chief Executive
and Director gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing
the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array
of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to
$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with
the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including
how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to
our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


ipurcbasefc for tbe Sltbrars of 

be TUniverait? of {Toronto 

out of tbe proceeds of tbe fun& 

bequeatbefc bp 



Stewart, 

OB. A.D. 1892. 




THE WORKS OF 
HERMAN MELVILLE 

STANDARD EDITION 

VOLUME 

VII 



MOBY- DICK 

OR, THE WHALE 

BY 

HERMAN MELVILLE 



IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. I 



CONSTABLE AND COMPANY LTD 

LONDON BOMBAY SYDNEY 
1922 



Ps 



Printed in Great Britain by T. and A. CONSTABLE LTD 
at the Edinburgh University Press 



IN TOKEN 

OF MY ADMIRATION FOB HIS GENIUS 

THIS BOOK IS INSCRIBED 

TO 

NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 



CONTENTS 

CHAP. PAGE 

I. LOOMINGS . 1 

II. THE CARPET-BAG ...... 8 

III. THE SPOUTER-INN . . . . . . 13 

IV. THE COUNTERPANE . . . . . 31 
V. BREAKFAST ...... 36 

VI. THE STREET . . . . . 39 

VII. THE CHAPEL . . . . . . 42 

VIII. THE PULPIT ....... 46 

IX. THE SERMON ...... 49 

X. A BOSOM FRIEND ...... 60 

XI. NIGHTGOWN 65 

XII. BIOGRAPHICAL ...... 68 

XIII. WHEELBARROW . . . . . . 71 

XIV. NANTUCKET ....... 77 

XV. CHOWDER ....... 80 

XVI. THE SHIP . 84 

XVII. THE RAMADAN ...... 102 

XVHI. HIS MARK ....... 110 

XIX. THE PROPHET . . . . . .115 

XX. ALL ASTIR ....... 119 

XXI. GOING ABOARD ...... 122 

XXII. MERRY CHRISTMAS . . . . .126 

XXIII. THE LEE SHORE . . . . . .132 

XXIV. THE ADVOCATE . . . . . .134 

XXV. POSTSCRIPT . . . . . 140 

XXVI. KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES . . . .141 

XXVII. KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES .... 145 

XXVIII. AHAB ....... 151 

vii 



viii MOBY-DICK 

CHAP. PAGE 

XXIX. ENTER AHAB ; TO HIM, STUBB . . .156 

XXX. THE PIPE ...... 160 

XXXI. QUEEN MAB 161 

XXXII. CETOLOGY . . . . . .164 

XXXIII. THE SPECKS YNDER 180 

XXXIV. THE CABIN -TABLE 184 

XXXV. THE MAST-HEAD . . . . .191 

XXXVI. THE QUARTER-DECK ..... 199 
XXXVII. SUNSET . . . . . . . 209 

XXXVIII. DUSK 211 

XXXIX. FIRST NIGHT-WATCH . . . . .213 

XL. MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE . . . .214 

XLI. MOBY-DICK ...... 222 

XLII. THE WHITENESS OF THE WHALE . . 234 

XLIII. HARK! 245 

XLIV. THE CHART ...... 247 

XLV. THE AFFIDAVIT ...... 254 

XLVI. SURMISES 265 

XLVII. THE MAT-MAKER 269 

XLVIII. THE FIRST LOWERING . . . . . 273 

XLIX. THE HYENA ...... 286 

L. AHAB'S BOAT AND CREW. FED ALLAH . . 289 

LI. THE SPIRIT-SPOUT 293 

MI. THE ALBATROSS ...... 298 

Mil. THE GAM 301 

LIV. THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 306 

LV. OF THE MONSTROUS PICTURES OF WHALES . 331 

LVI. OF THE LESS ERRONEOUS PICTURES OF WHALES 337 

LVII. OF WHALES IN PAINT, IN TEETH, ETC. . 342 

LVIII. BRIT 346 

LIX. SQUID 350 

LX. THE LINE . 353 



MOBY-DICK 

OR 

THE WHALE 



ETYMOLOGY 

(SUPPLIED BY A LATE CONSUMPTIVE USHER TO 
A GBAMMAB SCHOOL) 

THE pale Usher threadbare in coat, heart, body, and brain ; 
I see him now. He was ever dusting his old lexicons and 
grammars, with a queer handkerchief, mockingly embellished 
with all the gay flags of all the known nations of the world. 
He loved to dust his old grammars ; it somehow mildly 
reminded him of his mortality. 



ETYMOLOGY 



' WHILE you take in hand to school others, and to teach 
them by what name a whale-fish is to be called in our tongue, 
leaving out, through ignorance, the letter H, which almost 
alone maketh up the signification of the word, you deliver 
that which is not true.' Hakluyt. 

1 WHALE. * * * Sw. and Dan. hval. This animal is 
named from roundness or rolling ; for in Dan. hvalt is arched 
or vaulted.' Webster's Dictionary. 

' WHALE. * * * It is more immediately from the Dut. 
and Ger. W alien ; A.S. Walw-ian y to roll, to wallow.' 

Richardson's Dictionary. 

Hebrew. 

Greek. 

Latin, 

Anglo-Saxon. 

Danish. 

Dutch. 

Swedish. 

Icelandic. 

English. 



in, 



CETUS, 

WHCEL, 

HVALT, 

WAL, 

HWAL, 

WHALE, 

WHALE, 

BALEINE, 

BALLENA, 

PEKEE-NUEE-NUEE, 

PEHEE-NUEE-NUEE, 



French. 
Spanish. 
Feegee. 
Erromangoan. 



EXTRACTS 
(SUPPLIED BY A SUB-SUB-LIBRARIAN) 

IT will be seen that this mere painstaking burrower and 
grub -worm of a poor devil of a Sub -Sub appears to have gone 
through the long Vaticans and street-stalls of the earth, pick- 
ing up whatever random allusions to whales he could anyways 
find in any book whatsoever, sacred or profane. Therefore 
you must not, in every case at least, take the higgledy-piggledy 
whale statements, however authentic, in these extracts, for 
veritable gospel cetology. Far from it. As touching the 
ancient authors generally, as well as the poets here appearing, 
these extracts are solely valuable or entertaining, as affording 
a glancing bird's-eye view of what has been promiscuously 
said, thought, fancied, and sung of Leviathan, by many 
nations and generations, including our own. 

So fare thee well, poor devil of a Sub-Sub, whose commen- 
tator I am. Thou belongest to that hopeless, sallow tribe 
which no wine of this world will ever warm ; and for whom 
even Pale Sherry would be too rosy-strong ; but with whom 
one sometimes loves to sit, and feel poor-devilish, too ; and 
grow convivial upon tears ; and say to them bluntly with full 
eyes and empty glasses, and in not altogether unpleasant 
sadness Give it up, Sub-Subs ! For by how much the more 
pains ye take to please the world, by so much the more shall 
ye forever go thankless ! Would that I could clear out 
Hampton Court and the Tuileries for ye ! But gulp down 
your tears and hie aloft to the royal-mast with your hearts ; 
for your friends who have gone before are clearing out the 
seven-storied heavens, and making refugees of long-pampered 
Gabriel, Michael, and Raphael, against your coming. Here 
ye strike but splintered hearts together there, ye shall 
strike unsplinterable glasses! 



xii 



EXTRACTS 

' And God created great whales.' 



Genesis. 



* Leviathan maketh a path to shine after him ; 
One would think the deep to be hoary.' 

Job. 

' Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up 
Jonah.' Jonah. 

' There go the ships ; there is that Leviathan whom thou 
hast made to play therein.' Psalms. 

' In that day, the Lord with his sore, and great, and strong 
sword, shall punish Leviathan the piercing serpent, even 
Leviathan that crooked serpent ; and he shall slay the dragon 
that is in the sea.' Isaiah. 

* And what thing soever besides cometh within the chaos 
of this monster's mouth, be it beast, boat, or stone, down it 
goes all incontinently that foul great swallow of his, and 
perisheth in the bottomless gulf of his paunch.' 

HollancFs Plutarch's Morals. 

' The Indian Sea breedeth the most and the biggest fishes 
that are : among which the Whales and Whirlpooles called 
Balaene, take up as much in length as four acres or arpens of 
land.' Holland's Pliny. 

' Scarcely had we proceeded two days on the sea, when 
about sunrise a great many Whales and other monsters of 
the sea, appeared. Among the former, one was of a most 
monstrous size. * * * This came towards us, open- 
mouthed, raising the waves on all sides, and beating the sea 
before him into a foam.' 

Tooke's Lucian. The True History. 

xiii 



xiv MOBY-DICK 

' He visited this country also with a view of catching horse - 
whales, which had bones of very great value for their teeth, 
of which he brought some to the king. * * * The best 
whales were catched in his own country, of which some were 
forty-eight, some fifty yards long. He said that he was one 
of six who had killed sixty in two days.' 

Other or Octher's verbal narrative taken down 
from his mouth by King Alfred, A.D. 890. 

1 And whereas all the other things, whether beast or vessel, 
that enter into the dreadful gulf of this monster's (whale's) 
mouth, are immediately lost and swallowed up, the sea- 
gudgeon retires into it in great security, and there sleeps.' 
Montaigne 1 s Apology for Eaimond Sebond. 

' Let us fly, let us fly ! Old Nick take me if it is not 
Leviathan described by the noble prophet Moses in the life 
of patient Job.' Rabelais. 

' This whale's liver was two cart-loads.' 

Stowe's Annals. 

1 The great Leviathan that maketh the seas to seethe like 
boiling pan.' Lord Bacon's Version of the Psalms. 

' Touching that monstrous bulk of the whale or ork we 
have received nothing certain. They grow exceeding fat, 
insomuch that an incredible quantity of oil will be extracted 
out of one whale.' Ibid. History of Life and Death. 

1 The sovereignest thing on earth is parmacetti for an in- 
ward bruise.' King Henry. 

' Very like a whale.' Hamlet. 

' Which to secure, no skill of leach's art 
Mote him availle, but to returne againe 
To his wound's worker, that with lowly dart, 
Dinting his breast, had bred his restless paine, 
Like as the wounded whale to shore flies thro' the maine.' 

The Fairie Queen. 

' Immense as whales, the motion of whose vast bodies can 
in a peaceful calm trouble the ocean till it boil.' 

Sir William Davenant's Preface to Gondibert. 



EXTRACTS xv 

' What spermaceti! is, men might justly doubt, since the 
learned Hosmannus in his work of thirty years, saith plainly, 
Nescio quid sit.' 

Sir T. Browne's Of Sperma Ceti and the 
Sperma Ceti Whale. Vide his V.E. 

' Like Spencer's Talus with his modern flail 

He threatens ruin with his ponderous tail. 
****** 

Their fixed jav'lins in his side he wears, 
And on his back a grove of pikes appears.' 

Waller's Battle of the Summer Islands. 

' By art is created that great Leviathan, called a Common- 
wealth or State (in Latin, Civitas) which is but an artificial 
man.' Opening sentence of Hobbes's Leviathan. 

'Silly Mansoul swallowed it without chewing, as if it had 
been a sprat in the mouth of a whale.' 

Pilgrim's Progress. 
* That sea beast 

Leviathan, which God of all his works 
Created hugest that swim the ocean stream.' 

Paradise Lost. 
4 There Leviathan, 

Hugest of living creatures, in the deep 
Stretched like a promontory sleeps or swims, 
And seems a moving land ; and at his gills 
Draws in, and at his breath spouts out a sea.' 

Ibid. 

' The mighty whales which swim in a sea of water, and 
have a sea of oil swimming in them.' 

Fuller's Profane and Holy State. 
' So close behind some promontory lie 

The huge Leviathans to attend their prey, 
And give no chace, but swallow in the fry, 

Which through their gaping jaws mistake the way.' 
Dry den's Annus Mirabilis. 

' While the whale is floating at the stern of the ship, they 
cut off his head, and tow it with a boat as near the shore as it 
will come ; but it will be aground in twelve or thirteen feet 
water.' 

Thomas Edge's Ten Voyages to Spitzbergen, in Purchas. 



xvi MOBY-DICK 

* In their way they saw many whales sporting in the ocean, 
and in wantonness fuzzing up the water through their pipes 
and vents, which nature has placed on their shoulders.' 

Sir T. Herberts Voyages into Asia and Africa. Harris Coll. 

4 Here they saw such huge troops of whales, that they were 
forced to proceed with a great deal of caution for fear they 
should run their ship upon them.' 

Schouten's Sixth Circumnavigation. 

* We set sail from the Elbe, wind N.E. in the ship called 
The Jonas-in-the-Whale. * * * 

Some say the whale can't open his mouth, but that is a 
fable. * * * 

They frequently climb up the masts to see whether they 
can see a whale, for the first discoverer has a ducat for his 
pains. * * * 

I was told of a whale taken near Shetland, that had above 
a barrel of herrings in his belly. * * * 

One of our harpooneers told me that he caught once a 
whale in Spitzbergen that was white all over.' 

A Voyage to Greenland, A.D. 1671. Harris Coll. 

' Several whales have come in upon this coast (Fife). Anno 
1652, one eighty feet in length of the whale -bone kind came 
in, which, (as I was informed) besides a vast quantity of oil, 
did afford 500 weight of baleen. The jaws of it stand for a 
gate in the garden of Pitferren.' 

Sibbald's Fife and Kinross. 

4 Myself have agreed to try whether I can master and kill 
this Sperma-ceti whale, for I could never hear of any of that 
sort that was killed by any man, such is his fierceness and 
swiftness.' 

Richard Strafford's Letter from the Bermudas. 
Phil. Trans. A.D. 1668. 

' Whales in the sea 
God's voice obey.' 

N. E. Primer. 

1 We saw also abundance of large whales, there being more 
in those southern seas, as I may say, by a hundred to one ; 
than we have to the northward of us.' 

Captain Cowley's Voyage round the Globe, A.D. 1729. 



EXTRACTS xvii 

****** an( j ^e breath of the whale is fre- 
quently attended with such an insupportable smell, as to 
bring on a disorder of the brain.' 

Ulloa's South America. 

1 To fifty chosen sylphs of special note, 
We trust the important charge, the petticoat. 
Oft have we known that seven-fold fence to fail, 
Tho' stuffed with hoops and armed with ribs of whale.' 

Rape of the Lock. 

' If we compare land animals in respect to magnitude, with 
those that take up their abode in the deep, we shall find they 
will appear contemptible in the comparison. The whale is 
doubtless the largest animal in creation.' 

Goldsmith's Nat. Hist. 

' If you should write a fable for little fishes, you would 
make them speak like great whales.' 

Goldsmith to Johnson. 

' In the afternoon we saw what was supposed to be a rock, 
but it was found to be a dead whale, which some Asiatics had 
killed, and were then towing ashore. They seemed to en- 
deavour to conceal themselves behind the whale, in order to 
avoid being seen by us.' Cook's Voyages. 

' The larger whales, they seldom venture to attack. They 
stand in so great dread of some of them, that when out at 
sea they are afraid to mention even their names, and carry 
dung, lime-stone, juniper-wood, and some other articles of 
the same nature in their boats, in order to terrify and prevent 
their too near approach.' 

Uno Von Troil's Letters on Banks' s and 
Solander's Voyage to Iceland in 1772. 

' The Spermacetti Whale found by the Nantuckois, is 
an active, fierce animal, and requires vast address and bold- 
ness in the fishermen.' 

Thomas Jefferson's Whale Memorial to the 
French Minister in 1778. 

1 And pray, sir, what in the world is equal to it ? ' 

Edmund Burke's Reference in Parliament 

to the Nantucket Whale Fishery. 
VOL. I. b 



xviii MOBY-DICK 

' Spain a great whale stranded on. the shores of Europe.' 

Edmund Burke. (Somewhere.} 

' A tenth branch of the king's ordinary revenue, said to 
be grounded on the consideration of his guarding and pro- 
tecting the seas from pirates and robbers, is the right to 
royal fish, which are whale and sturgeon. And these, when 
either thrown ashore or caught near the coast, are the pro- 
perty of the king.' Blackstone. 

c Soon to the sport of death the crews repair : 
Rodmond unerring o'er his head suspends 
The barbed steel, and every turn attends.' 

Falconer's Shipwreck. 

' Bright shone the roofs, the domes, the spires, 

And rockets blew self driven, 
To hang their momentary fire 
Around the vault of heaven. 

' So fire with water to compare, 

The ocean serves on high, 

Up-spouted by a whale in air, 

To express unwieldy joy.' 

Cowper, On the Queen's Visit to London. 

' Ten or fifteen gallons of blood are thrown out of the heart 
at a stroke, with immense velocity.' 

John Hunter's Account of the Dissection 
of a Whale. (A small-sized one.) 

' The aorta of a whale is larger in the bore than the main 
pipe of the water- works at London Bridge, and the water 
roaring in its passage through that pipe is inferior in impetus 
and velocity to the blood gushing from the whale's heart.' 

Paley's Theology. 

' The whale is a mammiferous animal without hind feet.' 

Baron Cuvier. 

' In 40 degrees south, we saw Spermacetti Whales, but did 
not take any till the first of May, the sea being then covered 
with them.' 

Colnett's Voyage for the Purpose of Extending 
the Spermacetti Whale Fishery. 



EXTRACTS xix 

' In the free element beneath me swam, 
Floundered and dived, in play, in chace, in battle, 
Fishes of every colour, form, and kind ; 
Which language cannot paint, and mariner 
Had never seen ; from dread Leviathan 
To insect millions peopling every wave : 
Gather'd in shoals immense, like floating islands, 
Led by mysterious instincts through that waste 
And trackless region, though on every side 
Assaulted by voracious enemies, 
Whales, sharks, and monsters, arm'd in front or jaw, 
With swords, saws, spiral horns, or hooked fangs.' 

Montgomery' '<$ World before the Flood. 

' lo ! Paean ! lo ! sing, 
To the finny people's king. 
Not a mightier whale than this 
In the vast Atlantic is ; 
Not a fatter fish than he, 
Flounders round the Polar Sea.' 

CJiarles Lamb's Triumph of the Whale. 

' In the year 1690 some persons were on a high hill observing 
the whales spouting and sporting with each other, when one 
observed ; there pointing to the sea is a green pasture 
where our children's grand-children will go for bread.' 

Obed Macy's History of Nantucket. 

' I built a cottage for Susan and myself and made a gateway 
in the form of a Gothic Arch, by setting up a whale's jaw 
bones.' Hawthorne's Twice-Told Tales. 

' She came to bespeak a monument for her first love, who 
had been killed by a whale in the Pacific ocean, no less than 
forty years ago.' Ibid. 

' " No, Sir, 'tis a Right Whale," answered Tom ; " I saw his 
spout ; he threw up a pair of as pretty rainbows as a Christian 
would wish to look at. He 's a raal oil-butt, that fellow ! " ' 

Cooper's Pilot. 

' The papers were brought in,, and we saw in the Berlin 
Gazette that whales had been introduced on the stage there.' 
Eckermanris Conversations with Goethe. 



xx MOBY-DICK 

' " My God ! Mr. Chace, what is the matter ? " I answered, 
" We have been stove by a whale." ! 

Narrative of the Shipwreck of the Whale Ship 
Essex of Nantucket, which was attacked and 
finally destroyed by a large Sperm Whale in 
the Pacific Ocean. By Owen Chace of Nan- 
tucket, first mate of said vessel. New York, 
1821. 

' A mariner sat in the shrouds one night, 

The wind was piping free ; 

Now bright, now dimmed, was the moonlight pale, 
And the phospher gleamed in the wake of the whale, 
As it floundered in the sea.' 

Elizabeth Oakes Smith. 

' The quantity of line withdrawn from the different boats 
engaged in the capture of this one whale, amounted alto- 
gether to 10,440 yards or nearly six English miles. * * * 

t Sometimes the whale shakes its tremendous tail in the 
air, which, cracking like a whip, resounds to the distance of 
three or four miles.' Scoresby. 

1 Mad with the agonies he endures from these fresh attacks, 
the infuriated Sperm Whale rolls over and over ; he rears his 
enormous head, and with wide expanded jaws snaps at every- 
thing around him ; he rushes at the boats with his head ; 
they are propelled before him with vast swiftness, and some- 
times utterly destroyed. 

* * * It is a matter of great astonishment that the 
consideration of the habits of so interesting, and, in a com- 
mercial point of view, of so important an animal (as the Sperm 
Whale) should have been so entirely neglected, or should have 
excited so little curiosity among the numerous, and many of 
them competent observers, that of late years must have 
possessed the most abundant and the most convenient oppor- 
tunities of witnessing their habitudes. 5 

Thomas Beale's History of the Sperm Whale. 1839. 

' The Cachalot ' (Sperm Whale) ' is not only better armed 
than the True Whale ' (Greenland or Right Whale) ' in possess- 
ing a formidable weapon at either extremity of its body, 
but also more frequently displays a disposition to employ 
these weapons offensively, and in a manner at once so artful, 



EXTRACTS xxi 

bold, and mischievous, as to lead to its being regarded as the 
most dangerous to attack of all the known species of the 
whale tribe.' 

Frederick Debell Bennett's Whaling Voyage 
round the Globe. 1840. 

' October 13. " There she blows," was sung out from the 
mast-head. 

" Where away ? " demanded the captain. 

" Three points off the lee bow, sir." 

" Raise up your wheel. Steady ! " 

" Steady, sir." 

" Mast-head ahoy ! Do you see that whale now ? " 

" Ay, ay, sir ! A shoal of Sperm Whales ! There she 
blows ! There she breaches ! " 

" Sing out ! sing out every time ! " 

" Ay, ay, sir ! There she blows ! there there thar she 
blows bowes bo-o-o-s ! " 

" How far off ? " 

c< Two miles and a half." 

" Thunder and lightning ! so near ! Call all hands ! " 

J. Ross Browne's Etchings of a 
Whaling Cruise. 1846. 

4 The Whale-ship Globe, on board of which vessel occurred 
the horrid transactions we are about to relate, belonged to 
the island of Nantucket.' 

Narrative of the Globe Mutiny, by 
Lay and Hussey, Survivors. A.D. 1828. 

c Being once pursued by a whale which he had wounded, 
he parried the assault for some time with a lance ; but the 
furious monster at length rushed on the boat ; himself and 
comrades only being preserved by leaping into the water 
when they saw the onset was inevitable. 5 

Missionary Journal of Tyerman and Bennett. 

' Nantucket itself,' said Mr. Webster, ' is a very striking 
and peculiar portion of the National interest. There is a 
population of eight or nine thousand persons, living here 
in the sea, adding largely every year to the National wealth 
by the boldest and most persevering industry.' 

Report of Daniel Webster's Speech in the U.S. 
Senate, on the Application for the Erection 
of a Breakwater at Nantucket. 1828. 



xxii . MOBY-DICK 

' The whale fell directly over him, and probably killed him 
in a moment.' 

The Whale and his Captors, or the Whale- 
man's Adventures and the Whale's Bio- 
graphy, gathered on the Homeward Cruise 
of the Commodore Preble. By Rev. Henry 
T. Cheever. 

' " If you make the least damn bit of noise," replied Samuel, 
" I will send you to hell." ' 

Life of Samuel Comstock (the Mutineer), by 
his Brother, William Comstock. Another 
Version of the Whale-ship Globe Narrative. 

' The voyages of the Dutch and English to the Northern 
Ocean, in order, if possible, to discover a passage through it 
to India, though they failed of their main object, laid open 
the haunts of the whale.' 

McCulloch's Commercial Dictionary. 

4 These things are reciprocal ; the ball rebounds, only to 
bound forward again ; for now in laying open the haunts 
of the whale, the whalemen seem to have indirectly hit upon 
new clews to that same mystic North -West Passage.' 

From ' Something ' unpublished. 

4 It is impossible to meet a whale-ship on the ocean with- 
out being struck by her near appearance. The vessel under 
short sail, with look-outs at the mast-heads, eagerly scanning 
the wide expanse around them, has a totally different air 
from those engaged in a regular voyage.' 

Currents and Whaling. U.S. Ex. Ex. 

1 Pedestrians in the vicinity of London and elsewhere may 
recollect having seen large curved bones set upright in the 
earth, either to form arches over gateways, or entrances to 
alcoves, and they may perhaps have been told that these 
were the ribs of whales.' 

Tales of a Whale Voyager to the Arctic Ocean. 

' It was not till the boats returned from the pursuit of these 
whales, that the whites saw their ship in bloody possession 
of the savages enrolled among the crew.' 

Newspaper Account of the Taking and Retaking 
of the Whale-ship Hobomack. 



EXTRACTS xxiii 

' It is generally well known that out of the crews of Whaling 
vessels (American) few ever return in the ships on board of 
which they departed.' Cruise in a Whale Boat. 

1 Suddenly a mighty mass emerged from the water, and 
shot up perpendicularly into the air. It was the whale.' 

Miriam Coffin or the Whale Fisherman. 

' The Whale is harpooned to be sure ; but bethink you, 
how you would manage a powerful unbroken colt, with the 
mere appliance of a rope tied to the root of his tail.' 

A Chapter on WJialing in Ribs and Trucks. 

' On one occasion I saw two of these monsters (whales) 
probably male and female, slowly swimming, one after the 
other, within less than a stone's throw of the shore ' (Tierra 
del Fuego), ' over which the beech tree extended its branches.' 

Darwin's Voyage of a Naturalist. 

' " Stern all ! " exclaimed the mate, as upon turning his 
head, he saw the distended jaws of a large Sperm Whale 
close to the head of the boat, threatening it with instant 
destruction ; " Stern all, for your lives ! " 

Wharton the Whale Killer. 

' So be cheery, my lads, let your hearts never fail, 
While the bold harpooneer is striking the whale ! ' 

Nantucket Song. 

' Oh, the rare old Whale, mid storm and gale, 

In his ocean home will be 
A giant in might, where might is right, 
And King of the boundless sea.' 

Whale Song. 



MOBY-DICK 

CHAPTER I 

LOOMINGS 

CALL me Ishmael. Some years ago never mind how 
long precisely having little or no money in my purse, 
and nothing particular to interest me on shore, I thought 
I would sail about a little and see the watery part of the 
world. It is a way I have of driving off the spleen, and 
regulating the circulation. Whenever I find myself 
growing grim about the mouth ; whenever it is a damp, 
drizzly November in my soul ; whenever I find myself 
involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses, and bring- 
ing up the rear of every funeral I meet ; and especially 
whenever my hypos get such an upper hand of me, that 
it requires a strong moral principle to prevent me from 
deliberately stepping into the street, and methodically 
knocking people's hats off then, I account it high time 
to get to sea as soon as I can. This is my substitute for 
pistol and ball. With a philosophical flourish Cato throws 
himself upon his sword ; I quietly take to the ship. 
There is nothing surprising in this. If they but knew 
it, almost all men in their degree, some time or other, 
cherish very nearly the same feelings toward the ocean 
with me. 

There now is your insular city of the Manhattoes, 
belted round by wharves as Indian isles by coral reefs 
commerce surrounds it with her surf. Right and left, the 
streets take you waterward. Its extreme down -town is the 
battery, where that noble mole is washed by waves, and 

VOL. I. A 



2 MOBY-DICK 

cooled by breezes, which a few hours previous were out of 
sight of land. Look at the crowds of water -gazers there. 

Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath after- 
noon. Go from Corlears Hook to Coenties Slip, and 
from thence, by Whitehall, northward. What do you 
see ? Posted like silent sentinels all around the town, 
stand thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed 
in ocean reveries. Some leaning against the spiles ; 
some seated upon the pier-heads ; some looking over 
Vhe bulwarks of ships from China ; some high aloft in 
the rigging, as if striving to get a still better seaward 
peep. But these are all landsmen ; of week days pent 
up in lath and plaster tied to counters, nailed to benches, 
clinched to desks. How then is this ? Are the green 
fields gone ? What do they here ? 

But look ! here come more crowds, pacing straight for 
the water, and seemingly bound for a dive. Strange ! 
Nothing will content them but the extremest limit of the 
land ; loitering under the shady lee of yonder warehouses 
will not suffice. No. They must get just as nigh the 
water as they possibly can without falling in. And there 
they stand miles of them leagues. Inlanders all, they 
come from lanes and alleys, streets and avenues north, 
east, south, and west. Yet here they all unite. Tell me, 
does the magnetic virtue of the needles of the compasses 
of all those ships attract them thither ? 

Once more. Say, you are in the country ; in some 
high land of lakes. Take almost any path you please, 
and ten to one it carries you down in a dale, and leaves 
you there by a pool in the stream. There is magic in it. 
Let the most absent-minded of men be plunged in his 
deepest reveries stand that man on his legs, set his feet 
a-going, and he will infallibly lead you to water, if water 
there be in all that region. Should you ever be athirst 
in the great American desert, try this experiment, if your 



LOOMINGS 3 

caravan happen to be supplied with a metaphysical 
professor. Yes, as everyone knows, meditation andli 
water are wedded forever. 

But here is an artist. He desires to paint you the 
dreamiest, shadiest, quietest, most enchanting bit of 
romantic landscape in all the valley of the Saco. What 
is the chief element he employs ? There stand his trees, 
each with a hollow trunk, as if a hermit and a crucifix 
were within ; and here sleeps his meadow, and there sleep 
his cattle ; and up from yonder cottage goes a sleepy 
smoke. Deep into distant woodlands winds a mazy way, 
reaching to overlapping spurs of mountains bathed in 
their hillside blue. But though the picture lies thus 
tranced, and though this pine-tree shakes down its sighs 
like leaves upon this shepherd's head, yet all were 
vain, unless the shepherd's eye were fixed upon the 
magic stream before him. Go visit the Prairies in June, 
when for scores on scores of miles you wade knee -deep 
among tiger-lilies what is the one charm wanting ?- 
Water there is not a drop of water there ! Were Niagara 
but a cataract of sand, would you travel your thousand 
miles to see it ? Why did the poor poet of Tennessee, 
upon suddenly receiving two handfuls of silver, deliberate 
whether to buy him a coat, which he sadly needed, or 
invest his money in a pedestrian trip to Rockaway Beach ? 
Why is almost every robust healthy boy with a robust 
healthy soul in him, at some time or other crazy to go to 
sea ? Why upon your first voyage as a passenger, did 
you yourself feel such a mystical vibration, when first ; 
told that you and your ship were now out of sight of ' 
land ? Why did the old Persians hold the sea holy ? 
Why did the Greeks give it a separate deity, and own 
brother of Jove ? Surely all this is not without meaning. 
And still deeper the meaning of that story of Narcissus, 
who because he could not grasp the tormenting, mild 



4 MOBY-DICK 

image he saw in the fountain, plunged into it and was 
drowned. But that same image, we ourselves see in all 
rivers and oceans. It is the image of the ungraspable 
phantom of life ; and this is the key to it all. 

Now, when I say that I am in the habit of going to sea 
whenever I begin to grow hazy about the eyes, and begin 
to be over conscious of my lungs, I do not mean to have 
it inferred that I ever go to sea as a passenger. For to 
go as a passenger you must needs have a purse, and a 
purse is but a rag unless you have something in it. Be- 
sides, passengers get sea-sick grow quarrelsome don't 
sleep of nights do not enjoy themselves much, as a 
general thing ; no, I never go as a passenger ; nor, 
though I am something of a salt, do I ever go to sea as a 
Commodore, or a Captain, or a Cook. I abandon the 
glory and distinction of such offices to those who like 
them. For my part, I abominate all honourable respect- 
able toils, trials, and tribulations of every kind what- 
soever. It is quite as much as I can do to take care 
of myself, without taking care of ships, barques, brigs, 
schooners, and what not. And as for going as cook, 
though I confess there is considerable glory in that, a 
cook being a sort of officer on shipboard yet, somehow, 
I never fancied broiling fowls ; though once broiled, 
judiciously buttered, and judgmatically salted and 
peppered, there is no one who will speak more respect- 
fully, not to say reverentially, of a broiled fowl than I 
will. It is out of the idolatrous do tings of the old 
Egyptians upon broiled ibis and roasted river horse, that 
you see the mummies of those creatures in their huge 
bake-houses the pyramids. 

No, when I go to sea, I go as a simple sailor, right 
before the mast, plumb down into the forecastle, aloft 
there to the royal mast-head. True, they rather order 
me about some, and make me jump from spar to spar, 



LOOMINGS 5 

like a grasshopper in a May meadow. And at first, this 
sort of thing is unpleasant enough. It touches one's 
sense of honour, particularly if you come of an old estab- 
lished family in the land, the Van Rensselaers, or Ran- 
dolphs, or Hardicanutes. And more than all, if just 
previous to putting your hand into the tar-pot, you have 
been lording it as a country schoolmaster, making the 
tallest boys stand in awe of you. The transition is a 
keen one, I assure you, from a schoolmaster to a sailor, 
and requires a strong decoction of Seneca and the Stoics 
to enable you to grin and bear it. But even this wears 
off hi time. 

What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders 
me to get a broom and sweep down the decks ? What 
does that indignity amount to, weighed, I mean, in the 
scales of the New Testament ? Do you think the arch- 
angel Gabriel thinks anything the less of me, because I 
promptly and respectfully obey that old hunks in that 
particular instance ? Who ain/t a slave ? Tell me that. 
Well, then, however the~old^sea -captains may order me 
about however they may thump and punch me about, 
I have the satisfaction of knowing that it is all right ; 
that everybody else is one way or other served in much the 
same way either in a physical or metaphysical point of 
view, that is ; and so the universal thump is passed 
round, and all hands should rub each other's shoulder- 
blades, and be content. 

Again, I always go to sea as a sailor, because they make 
a point of paying me for my trouble, whereas they never 
pay passengers a single penny that I ever heard of. On 
the contrary, passengers themselves must pay. And 
there is all the difference in the world between paying 
and being paid. The act of paying is perhaps the most 
uncomfortable infliction that the two orchard thieves 
entailed upon us. But being paid, what will compare 



6 MOBY-DICK 

with it ? The urbane activity with which a man receives 
money is really marvellous, considering that we so 
earnestly believe money to be the root of all earthly ills, 
and that on no account can a monied man enter heaven. 
Ah ! how cheerfully we consign ourselves to perdition ! 

Finally, I always go to sea as a sailor, because of the 
wholesome exercise and pure air of the forecastle deck. 
For as in this world, head-winds are far more prevalent 
than winds from astern (that is, if you never violate 
the Pythagorean maxim), so for the most part the com- 
modore on the quarter-deck gets his atmosphere at 
second hand from the sailors on the forecastle. He thinks 
he breathes it first ; but not so. In much the same 
way do the commonalty lead their leaders in many other 
things, at the same time that the leaders little suspect it. 
But wherefore it was that after having repeatedly smelt 
the sea as a merchant sailor, I should now take it into 
my head to go on a whaling voyage ; this the invisible 
police-officer of the Fates, who has the constant surveil- 
lance of me, and secretly dogs me, and influences me in 
some unaccountable way he can better answer than any 
one else. And, doubtless, my going on this whaling 
voyage formed part of the grand programme of Provi- 
dence that was drawn up a long time ago. It came in 
as a sort of brief interlude and solo between more exten- 
sive performances. I take it that this part of the bill 
must have run something like this : 

' Grand Contested Election for the Presidency of the 
United States. 

' WHALING VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL. 

1 BLOODY BATTLE IN AFGHANISTAN.' 

Though I cannot tell why it was exactly that those 
stage managers, the Fates, put me down for this shabby 



LOOMINGS 7 

part of a whaling voyage, when others were set down 
for magnificent parts in high tragedies, and short and easy 
parts in genteel comedies, and jolly parts in farces 
though I cannot tell why this was exactly ; yet, now that 
I recall all the circumstances, I think I can see a little 
into the springs and motives which, being cunningly 
presented to me under various disguises, induced me to 
set about performing the part I did, besides cajoling me 
into the delusion that it was a choice resulting from my 
own unbiased freewill and discriminating judgment. 

Chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea 
of the great whale himself. Such a gortentous and 
mysterious monster roused all my curiosity. Then the 
wild and distant seas where he rolled his island bulk ; 
the undeliverable, nameless perils of the whale ; these, 
with all the attending marvels of a thousand Patagonian 
sights and sounds, helped to sway me to my wish. With 
other men, perhaps, such things would not have been 
inducements ; but as for me, I am tormented with an 
everlasting itch for things remote. I love to sail for- 
bidden seas, and land on barbarous coasts. Not ignoring 
what is good, I am quick to perceive a horror, and could 
still be social with it would they let me since it is 
but well to be on friendly terms with all the inmates of 
the place one lodges in. 

By reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage 
was welcome ; the great flood-gates of the wonder-world 
swung open, and in the wild conceits that swayed me to 
my purpose, two and two there floated into my inmost 
soul, endless processions of the whale, and, midmost of 
them all, one grand hooded phantom, like a snow hill in 
the air. 



CHAPTER II 

THE CARPET-BAG 

I stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag, tucked 
it under my arm, and started for Cape Horn and the 
Pacific. Quitting the good city of old Manhatto, I duly 
arrived in New Bedford. It was on a Saturday night in 
December. Much was I disappointed upon learning 
that the little packet for Nantucket had already sailed, 
and that no way of reaching that place would offer, till 
the following Monday. 

As most young candidates for the pains and penalties 
of whaling stop at this same New Bedford, thence to 
embark on their voyage, it may as well be related that I 5 
for one, had no idea of so doing. For my mind was made 
up to sail in no other than a Nantucket craft, because 
there was a fine, boisterous something about everything 
connected with that famous old island, which amazingly 
pleased me. Besides, though New Bedford has of late 
been gradually monopolising the business of whaling, and 
though in this matter poor old Nantucket is now much 
behind her, yet Nantucket was her great original the 
Tyre of this Carthage ; the place where the first dead 
American whale was stranded. Where else but from 
Nantucket did those aboriginal whalemen, the Red Men, 
first sally out in canoes to give chase to the leviathan ? 
And where but from Nantucket, too, did that first adven- 
turous little sloop put forth, partly laden with imported 
cobble-stones so goes the story to throw at the whales, 



THE CARPET-BAG 9 

in order to discover when they were nigh enough to risk 
a harpoon from the bowsprit ? 

Now having a night, a day, and still another night 
following before me in New Bedford, ere I could embark 
for my destined port, it became a matter of concernment 
where I was to eat and sleep meanwhile. It was a very 
dubious-looking, nay, a very dark and dismal night, 
bitingly cold and cheerless. I knew no one in the place. 
With anxious grapnelsJE had sounded my pocket, and only 
brought up a few pieces of silver. So, wherever you go, 
Ishmael, said I to myself, as I stood in the middle of a 
dreary street shouldering my bag, and comparing the 
gloom toward the north with the darkness toward the 
south wherever in your wisdom you may conclude to 
lodge for the night, my dear Ishmael, be sure to inquire 
the price, and don't be too particular. 

With halting steps I paced the streets, and passed the 
sign of 'The Crossed Harpoons ' but it looked too expen- 
sive and jolly there. Further on, from the bright red 
windows of the ' Sword-Fish Inn,' there came such fer- 
vent rays, that it seemed to have melted the packed snow 
and ice from before the house, for everywhere else the 
congealed frost lay ten inches thick in a hard, asphaltic 
pavement, rather weary for me, when I struck my foot 
against the flinty projections, because from hard, remorse- 
less service the soles of mv boots were in a most miserable 

V 

plight. Too expensive and jolly, again thought I, pausing 
one moment to watch the broad glare in the street, and 
hear the sounds of the tinkling glasses within. But go i 
on, Ishmael, said I at last ; don't you hear ? get away l 
from before the door ; your patched boots are stopping 
the way. So on I went. I now by instinct followed the 
streets that took me waterward, for there, doubtless, 
were the cheapest, if not the cheeriest inns. 

Such dreary streets ! blocks of blackness, not houses, 



10 MOBY-DICK 

on either hand, and here and there a candle, like a candle 
moving about in a tomb. At this hour of the night, of 
the last day of the week, that quarter of the town proved 
all but deserted. But presently I carne to a smoky 
light proceeding from a low, wide building, the door of 
which stood invitingly open. It had a careless look, as 
if it were meant for the uses of the public ; so, entering, 
the first thing I did was to stumble over an ash-box in 
the porch. Ha ! thought I, ha, as the flying particles 
almost choked me, are these ashes from that destroyed 
city, Gomorrah ? But ' The Cfossed Harpoons ' and 
4 The Sword-Fish ' ? this, then, must needs be the sign 
of ' The Trap. ' However, I picked myself up , and hearing 
a loud voice within, pushed on and opened a second, 
interior door. 

It seemed the great Black Parliament sitting in Tophet. 
A hundred black faces turned round in their rows to peer ; 
and beyond, a black Angel of Doom was beating a book 
in a pulpit. It was a negro church ; and the preacher's 
text was about the blackness of darkness, and the weep- 
ing and wailing and teeth -gnashing there. Ha, Ishmael, 
muttered I, backing out, Wretched entertainment at the 
sign of ' The Trap ' ! 

Moving on, I at last came to a dim sort of light not far 
from the docks, and heard a forlorn creaking in the air ; 
and looking up, saw a swinging sign over the door with 
a white painting upon it, faintly representing a tall straight 
jet of misty spray, and these words underneath ' The 
Spouter-Inn : Peter Coffin.' 

Coffin ? Spouter ? Rather ominous in that particu- 
lar connection, thought I. But it is a common name in 
Nantucket, they say, and I suppose this Peter here is an 
emigrant from there. As the light looked so dim, and 
the place, for the time, looked quiet enough, and the 
dilapidated little wooden house itself looked as if it might 



THE CARPET-BAG 11 

have been carted here from the ruins of some burnt dis- 
trict, and as the swinging sign had a poverty-stricken sort 
of creak to it, I thought that here was the very spot for 
cheap lodgings, and the best of pea-coffee. 

It was a queer sort of place a gable-ended old house, 
one side palsied as it were, and leaning over sadly. It 
stood on a sharp bleak corner, where that tempestuous 
wind Euroclydon kept up a worse howling than ever it 
did about poor Paul's tossed craft. Euroclydon, never- 
theless, is a mighty pleasant zephyr to anyone indoors, 
with his feet on the hob quietly toasting for bed. 4 In 
judging of that tempestuous wind called Euroclydon,' 
says an old writer of whose works I possess the only 
copy extant ' it maketh a marvellous difference, 
whether thou lookest out at it from a glass window where 
the frost is all on the outside, or whether thou observest 
it from that Cashless window, where the frost is on both 
sides, and of which the wight Death is the only glazier.' 
True enough, thought I, as this passage occurred to my 
mind old black-letter, thou reasonest well. Yes, these 
eyes are windows, and this body of mine is the house. 
What a pity they didn't stop up the chinks and the 
crannies though, and thrust in a little lint here and there. 
But it 's too late to make any improvements now. The 
universe is finished ; the cope-stone is on, and the chips 
were carted off a million years ago. Poor Lazarus there, 
chattering his teeth against the curbstone for his pillow, 
and shaking off his tatters with his shiverings, he might 
plug up both ears with rags, and put a corn-cob into his 
mouth, and yet that would not keep out the tempestuous 
Euroclydon. Euroclydon ! says old Dives, in his red 
silken wrapper (he had a redder one afterward) pooh, 
pooh ! What a fine frosty night ; how Orion glitters ; 
what northern lights ! Let them talk of their oriental 
summer climes of everlasting conservatories ; give me 



12 MOBY-DICK 

the privilege of making my own summer with my own 
coals. 

But what thinks Lazarus ? Can he warm his blue 
hands by holding them up to the grand northern lights ? 
Would not Lazarus rather be in Sumatra than here ? 
Would he not far rather lay him down lengthwise along 
the line of the equator ; yea, ye gods ! go down to the 
fiery pit itself, in order to keep out this frost ? 

Now, that Lazarus should lie stranded there on the 
curbstone before the door of Dives, this is more wonderful 
than that an iceberg should be moored to one of the 
Moluccas. Yet Dives himself, he too lives like a Czar 
in an ice-palace made of frozen sighs, and being a president 
of a temperance society, he only drinks the tepid tears of 
orphans. 

But no more of this blubbering now, we are going a- 
whaling, and there is plenty of that yet to come. Let 
us scrape the ice from our frosted feet, and see what sort 
of a place this ' Spouter ' may be. 



CHAPTER III 

THE SPOTTTER-INN 

ENTERING that gable -ended Spouter-Inn, you found 
yourself in a wide, low, straggling entry with old-fashioned 
wainscots, reminding one of the bulwarks of some con- 
demned old craft. On one side hung a very large oil- 
painting so thoroughly besmoked, and every way defaced, 
that in the unequal cross-lights by which you viewed it, 
it was only by diligent study and a series of systematic 
visits to it, and careful inquiry of the neighbours, that 
you could any way arrive at an understanding of its 
purpose. Such unaccountable masses of shades and 
shadows, that at first you almost thought some ambitious 
young artist, in the time of the New England hags, had 
endeavoured to delineate chaos bewitched. But by dint 
of much and earnest contemplation, and oft-repeated 
ponderings, and especially by throwing open the little 
window toward the back of the entry, you at last come 
to the conclusion that such an idea, however wild, might 
not be altogether unwarranted. 

But what most puzzled and confounded you was a 
long, limber, portentous, black mass of something hover- 
ing in the centre of the picture over three blue, dim, 
perpendicular lines floating in a nameless yeast. A boggy, 
soggy, squitchy picture truly, enough to drive a nervous 
man distracted. Yet there was a sort of indefinite, half- 
attained, unimaginable sublimity about it that fairly 
froze you to it, till you in voluntarily, took an oath with 
yourself to find out what that marvellous painting meant. 

is 



14 MOBY-DICK 

Ever and anon a bright, but, alas, deceptive idea would 
dart you through. It 's the Black Sea in a midnight gale. 
It 's the unnatural combat of the four primal elements. 
It 's a blasted heath. It 's a Hyperborean winter scene. 
It 's the breaking-up of the ice-bound stream of Time. 
But at last all these fancies yielded to that one portentous 
something in the picture's midst. That once found out, 
and all the rest were plain. But stop ; does it not bear 
a faint resemblance to a gigantic fish ? even the great 
leviathan himself ? 

In fact, the artist's design seemed this : a final theory 
of my own, partly based upon the aggregated opinions 
of many aged persons with whom I conversed upon the 
subject. The picture represents a Cape-Horner in a great 
hurricane ; the half-foundered ship weltering there with 
its three dismantled masts alone visible ; and an exasper- 
ated whale, purposing to spring clean over the craft, is 
in the enormous act of impaling himself upon the three 
mast-heads. 

The opposite wall of this entry was hung all over with 
a heathenish array of monstrous clubs and spears. Some 
were thickly set with glittering teeth resembling ivory 
saws ; others were tufted with knots of human hair ; and 
one was sickle-shaped, with a vast handle sweeping round 
like the segment made in the new-mown grass by a long- 
armed mower. You shuddered as you gazed, and 
wondered what monstrous cannibal and savage could 
ever have gone a death-harvesting with such a hacking, 
horrifying implement. Mixed with these were rusty 
old whaling-lances and harpoons all broken and deformed. 
Some were storied weapons. With this once long lance, 
now wildly elbowed, fifty years ago did Nathan Swain 
kill fifteen whales between a sunrise and a sunset. And 
that harpoon so like a corkscrew now was flung in 
Javan seas, and run away with by a whale, years after- 



THE SPOUTER-INN 15 

ward slain off the Cape of Blanco. The original iron 
entered nigh the tail, and, like a restless needle sojourning 
in the body of a man, travelled full forty feet, and at last 
was found imbedded in the hump. 

Crossing this dusky entry, and on through yon low- 
arched way cut through what in old times must have 
been a great central chimney with fire-places all round 
you enter the public room. A still duskier place is this, 
with such low ponderous beams above, and such old 
wrinkled planks beneath, that you would almost fancy 
you trod some old craft's cockpits, especially of such a 
howling night, when this corner-anchored old ark rocked 
so furiously. On one side stood a long, low, shelf-like 
table covered with cracked glass cases, filled with dusty 
rarities gathered from this wide world's remotest nooks. 
Projecting from the further angle of the room stands a 
dark-looking den the bar a rude attempt at a right 
whale's head. Be that how it may, there stands the vast 
arched bone of the whale's jaw, so wide, a coach might 
almost drive beneath it. Within are shabby shelves, 
ranged round with old decanters, bottles, flasks ; and in 
those jaws of swift destruction, like another cursed Jonah 
(by which name indeed they called him), bustles a little 
withered old man, who, for their money, dearly sells the 
sailors deliriums and death. 

Abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his 
poison. Though true cylinders without within, the 
villainous green goggling glasses deceitfully tapered down- 
ward to a cheating bottom. Parallel meridians rudely 
pecked into the glass, surround these footpads' goblets. 
Fill to this mark, and your charge is but a penny ; to this 
a penny more ; and so on to the full glass the Cape 
Horn measure, which you may gulp down for a shilling. 
Upon entering the place I found a number of young 
seamen gathered about a table, examining by a dim light 



16 MOBY-DICK 

divers speiimens of skrimshander. I sought the land- 
lord, and telling him I desired to be accommodated with 
a room, received for answer that his house was full not 
a bed unoccupied. ' But avast, 5 he added, tapping his 
forehead, ' you hain't no objections to sharin* a har- 
pooneer 's blanket, have ye ? I s'pose you are goin' a- 
whalin 5 , so you 'd better get used to that sort of thing. 5 

I told him that I never liked to sleep two in a bed ; that 
if I should ever do so, it would depend upon who the 
harpooneer might be, and that if he (the landlord) really 
had no other place for me, and the harpooneer was not 
decidedly objectionable, why, rather than wander further 
about a strange town on so bitter a night, I would put 
up with the half of any decent man 5 s blanket. 

' I thought so. All right ; take a seat. Supper ? 
you want supper ? Supper 5 11 be ready directly. 5 

I sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all over like 
a bench on the Battery. At one end a ruminating tar 
was still further adorning it with his jack-knife, stooping 
over and diligently working away at the space between 
his legs. He was trying his hand at a ship under full sail, 
but he didn't make much headway, I thought. 

At last some four or five of us were summoned to our 
meal in an adjoining room. It was cold as Iceland 
no fire at all the landlord said he couldn't afford it. 
Nothing but two dismal tallow candles, each in a winding 
sheet. We were fain to button up our monkey-jackets, 
and hold to our lips cups of scalding tea with our half- 
frozen fingers. But the fare was of the most substantial 
kind not only meat and potatoes, but dumplings ; good 
heavens ! dumplings for supper ! One young fellow in 
a green box-coat addressed himself to these dumplings 
hi a most direful manner. 

' My boy,' said the landlord, ' you '11 have the night- 
mare to a dead sartainty.' 



THE SPOUTER-INN 17 

'Landlord,' I whispered, w that ain't the harpooneer, 
is it ? ' 

1 Oh, no/ said he, looking a sort of diabolically funny, 
4 the harpooneer is a dark - complexioned chap. He 
never eats dumplings, he don't he eats nothing but 
steaks, and likes 'em rare.' 

' The devil he does, ' says I. ' Where is that harpooneer ? 
Is he here ? ' 

' He '11 be here afore long,' was the answer. 

I could not help it, but I began to feel suspicious of 
this ' dark-complexioned ' harpooneer. At any rate, I 
made up my mind that if it so turned out that we should 
sleep together, he must undress and get into bed before 
I did. 

Supper over, the company went back to the bar-room, 
when, knowing not what else to do with myself, I resolved 
to spend the rest of the evening as a looker-on. 

Presently a rioting noise was heard without. Starting 
up, the landlord cried, ' That 's the Grampus's crew. I 
seed her reported in the offing this morning ; a three 
years' voyage, and a full ship. Hurrah, boys ; now we '11 
have the latest news from the Feegees.' 

A tramping of sea-boots was heard in the entry ; the 
door was flung open, and in rolled a wild set of mariners 
enough. Enveloped in their shaggy watch-coats, and 
with their heads muffled in woollen comforters, all be- 
darned and ragged, and their beards stiff with icicles, 
they seemed an eruption of bears from Labrador. They 
had just landed from their boat, and this was the first 
house they entered. No wonder, then, that they made 
a straight wake for the whale's mouth the bar when 
the wrinkled little old Jonah, there officiating, soon 
poured them out brimmers all round. One complained 
of a bad cold in his head, upon which Jonah mixed 
him a pitch-like potion of gin and molasses, which he 

VOL. I. B 



18 MOBY-DICK 

swore was a sovereign cure for all colds and catarrhs 
whatsoever, never mind of how long standing, or whether 
caught off the coast of Labrador, or on the weather-side 
of an ice -island. 

The liquor soon mounted into their heads, as it 
generally does even with the arrantest topers newly 
landed from sea, and they began capering about most 
obstreperously. 

I observed, however, that one of them held somewhat 
aloof, and though he seemed desirous not to spoil the 
hilarity of his shipmates by his own sober face, yet upon 
the whole he refrained from making as much noise as the 
rest. This man interested me at once ; and since the sea- 
gods had ordained that he should soon become my ship- 
mate (though but a sleeping-partner one, so far as this 
narrative is concerned), I will here venture upon a little 
description of him. He stood full six feet in height, with 
noble shoulders, and a chest like a coffer-dam. I have 
seldom seen such brawn in a man. His face was deeply 
brown and burnt, making his white teeth dazzling by the 
contrast ; while in the deep shadows of his eyes floated 
some reminiscences that did not seem to give him much 
joy. His voice at once announced that he was a 
Southerner, and from his fine stature, I thought he must 
be one of those tall mountaineers from the Alleghanian 
Ridge in Virginia. When the revelry of his companions 
had mounted to its height, this man slipped away unob- 
served, and I saw no more of him till he became my 
comrade on the sea. In a few minutes, however, he was 
missed by his shipmates, and being, it seems, for some 
reason a huge favourite with them, they raised a cry of 
' Bulkington ! Bulkington ! where 5 s Bulkington ? ' and 
darted out of the house in pursuit of him. 

It was now about nine o'clock, and the room seeming 
almost supernaturally quiet after these orgies, I began 



THE SPOUTER-INN 19 

to congratulate myself upon a little plan that had occurred 
to me just previous to the entrance of the seamen. 

No man prefers to sleep two in a bed. In fact, you 
would a good deal rather not sleep with your own brother. 
I don't know how it is, but people like to be private when 
they are sleeping. And when it comes to sleeping with 
an unknown stranger, in a strange inn, in a strange town, 
and that stranger a harpooneer, then your objections 
indefinitely multiply. Nor was there any earthly reason 
why I as a sailor should sleep two in a bed, more than 
anybody else ; for sailors no more sleep two in a bed at 
sea, than bachelor kings do ashore. To be sure, they 
all sleep together in one apartment, but you have your 
own hammock, and cover yourself with your own blanket, 
and sleep in your own skin. 

The more I pondered over this harpooneer, the more I 
abominated the thought of sleeping with him. It was 
fair to presume that being a harpooneer, his linen or 
woollen, as the case might be, would not be of the tidiest, 
certainly none of the finest. I began to twitch all over. 
Besides, it was getting late, and my decent harpooneer 
ought to be home and going bedward. Suppose now, 
he should tumble in upon me at midnight how could I 
tell from what vile hole he had been coming ? 

' Landlord ! I Ve changed my mind about that 
harpooneer. I shan't sleep with him. I '11 try the bench 
here.' 

' Just as you please ; I 'm sorry I can't spare ye a 
tablecloth for a mattress, and it 's a plaguy rough board 
here ' feeling of the knots and notches. ' But wait 
a bit, Skrimshander ; I Ve got a carpenter's plane there 
in the bar wait, I say, and I '11 make ye snug enough.' 
So saying he procured the plane ; and with his old silk 
handkerchief first dusting the bench, vigorously set to 
planing away at my bed, the while grinning like an ape. 



20 MOBY-DICK 

The shavings flew right and left ; till at last the plane- 
iron came bump against an indestructible knot. The 
landlord was near spraining his wrist, and I told him for 
heaven's sake to quit the bed was soft enough to suit 
me, and I did not know how all the planing in the world 
could make eider down of a pine plank. So gathering 
up the shavings with another grin, and throwing them 
into the great stove in the middle of the room, he went 
about his business, and left me in a brown study. 

I now took the measure of the bench, and found that 
it was a foot too short ; but that could be mended with 
a chair. But it was a foot too narrow, and the other 
bench in the room was about four inches higher than the 
planed one so there was no yoking them. I then placed 
the first bench lengthwise along the only clear space 
against the wall, leaving a little interval between, for my 
back to settle down in. But I soon found that there 
came such a draught of cold air over me from under the 
sill of the window, that this plan would never do at all, 
especially as another current from the rickety door met 
the one from the window, and both together formed a 
series of small whirlwinds in the immediate vicinity of the 
spot where I had thought to spend the night. 

The devil fetch that harpooneer, thought I, but stop, 
couldn't I steal a march on him bolt his door inside, and 
jump into his bed, not to be wakened by the most violent 
knockings ? It seemed no bad idea ; but upon second 
thoughts I dismissed it. For who could tell but what 
the next morning, so soon as I popped out of the room, 
the harpooneer might be standing in the entry, all ready 
to knock me down ! 

Still, looking round me again, and seeing no possible 
chance of spending a sufferable night unless in some other 
person's bed, I began to think that after all I might be 
cherishing unwarrantable prejudices against this unknown 



THE SPOQTER-INN 21 

harpooneer. Thinks I, I '11 wait awhile ; he must be 
dropping in before long. 1 11 have a good look at him 
then, and perhaps we may become jolly good bedfellows 
after all there 's no telling. 

But though the other boarders kept coming in by 
ones, twos, and threes, and going to bed, yet no sign of 
my harpooneer. 

4 Landlord ! ' said I, ' what sort of a chap is he does 
he always keep such late hours ? ' It was now hard 
upon twelve o'clock. 

The landlord chuckled again with his lean chuckle, 
and seemed to be mightily tickled at something beyond 
my comprehension. ' No,' he answered, ' generally he 5 s 
an early bird airley to bed and airley to rise yes, he 's 
the bird what catches the worm. But to-night he 
went out a-peddling, you see, and I don't see what 
on airth keeps him so late, unless, maybe, he can't sell 
his head.' 

' Can't sell his head ? What sort of a bamboozingly 
story is this you are telling me ? ' getting into a tower- 
ing rage. ' Do you pretend to say, landlord, that this 
harpooneer is actually engaged this blessed Saturday 
night, or rather Sunday morning, in peddling his head 
around this town ? ' 

' That 's precisely it,' said the landlord, ' and I told 
him he couldn't sell it here, the market 's overstocked.' 

' With what ? ' shouted I. 

' With heads, to be sure ; ain't there too many heads 
in the world ? ' 

' I tell you what it is, landlord,' said I, quite calmly, 
' you 'd better stop spinning that yarn to me I 'm not 
green.' 

6 Maybe not, ' taking out a stick and whittling a tooth- 
pick, ' but I rayther guess you '11 be done brown if that 
'ere harpooneer hears you a-slanderin' his head.' 



22 MOBY-DICK 

' I '11 break it for him/ said I, now flying into a passion 
again at this unaccountable farrago of the landlord's. 

' It 's broke a 'ready,' said he. 

' Broke/ said I ' broke, do you mean ? ' 

' Sartain, and that 's the very reason he can't sell it, 
I guess.' 

' Landlord/ said I, going up to him as cool as Mt. 
Hecla in a snow-storm, 'landlord, stop whittling. You 
and I must understand one another, and that too without 
delay. I come to your house and want a bed ; you tell 
me you can only give me half a one ; that the other half 
belongs to a certain harpooneer. And about this har- 
pooneer, whom I have not yet seen, you persist in telling 
me the most mystifying and exasperating stories, tending 
to beget in me an uncomfortable feeling toward the man 
whom you design for my bedfellow* a sort of connection, 
landlord, which is an intimate and confidential one in the 
highest degree. I now demand of you to speak out and 
tell me who and what this harpooneer is, and whether I 
shall be in all respects safe to spend the night with him. 
And in the first place, you will be so good as to unsay that 
story about selling his head, which if true I take to be 
good evidence that this harpooneer is stark mad, and I 've 
no idea of sleeping with a madman ; and you, sir, you 
I mean, landlord, you, sir, by trying to induce me to do 
so knowingly, would thereby render yourself liable to a 
criminal prosecution.' 

' Wall/ said the landlord, fetching a long breath, 'that 's 
a purty long sarmon for a chap that rips a little now and 
then. But be easy, be easy, this here harpooneer I have 
been tellin' you of has just arrived from the South Seas, 
where he bought up a lot of 'balmed New Zealand heads 
(great curios, you know), and he 's sold all on 'em but 
one, and that one he 's tryin' to sell to-night, cause to- 
morrow 's Sunday, and it would not do to be sellin' 



THE SPOUTER-INN 23 

human heads about the streets when folks is goin' to 
churches. He wanted to, last Sunday, but I stopped him 
just as he was goin' out of the door with four heads strung 
on a string, for all the airth like a string of inions.' 

This account cleared up the otherwise unaccountable 
mystery, and showed that the landlord, after all, had had 
no idea of fooling me but at the same time what could 
I think of a harpooneer who stayed out of a Saturday 
night clean into the holy Sabbath, engaged in such a 
cannibal business as selling the heads of dead idolaters ? 

' Depend upon it, landlord, that harpooneer is a danger- 
ous man.' 

' He pays reg'lar, 5 was the rejoinder. ' But come, 
it 's getting dreadful late, you had better be turning 
flukes it 's a nice bed : Sail and me slept in that 'ere 
bed the night we were spliced. There 's plenty room for 
two to kick about in that bed ; it 's an almighty big bed 
that. Why, afore we give it up, Sal used to put our Sam 
and little Johnny in the foot of it. But I got a-dreaming 
and sprawling about one night, and somehow, Sam got 
pitched on the floor, and came near breaking his arm. 
Arter that, Sal said it wouldn't do. Come along here, 
I '11 give ye a glim in a jiffy ' ; and so saying he lighted a 
candle and held it toward me, offering to lead the way. 
But I stood irresolute ; when looking at a clock in the 
corner, he exclaimed, ' I vum it 's Sunday you won't 
see that harpooneer to-night ; he 's come to anchor some- 
where come along then ; do come ; won't ye come ? ' 

I considered the matter a moment, and then upstairs 
we went, and I was ushered into a small room, cold as a 
clam, and furnished, sure enough, with a prodigious bed, 
almost big enough indeed for any four harpooneers to 
sleep abreast. 

' There,' said the landlord, placing the candle on a 
crazy old sea-chest that did double duty as a wash-stand 



24 MOBY-DICK 

and centre table ; ' there, make yourself comfortable 
now, and good night to ye.' I turned round from eyeing 
the bed, but he had disappeared. 

Folding back the counterpane, I stooped over the bed. 
Though none of the most elegant, it yet stood the scrutiny 
tolerably well. I then glanced round the room ; and 
besides the bedstead and centre table, could see no other 
furniture belonging to the place, but a rude shelf, the four 
walls, and a papered fire-board representing a man striking 
a whale. Of things not properly belonging to the room, 
there was a hammock lashed up, and thrown upon the 
floor in one corner ; also a large seaman's bag, containing 
the harpooneer's wardrobe, no doubt in lieu of a land trunk. 
Likewise, there was a parcel of outlandish bone fish-hooks 
on the shelf over the fire-place, and a tall harpoon stand- 
ing at the head of the bed. 

But what is this on the chest ? I took it up, and held 
it close to the light, and felt it, and smelt it, and tried 
every way possible to arrive at some satisfactory con- 
clusion concerning it. I can compare it to nothing but 
a large door-mat, ornamented at the edges with little 
tinkling tags something like the stained porcupine quills 
round an Indian moccasin. There was a hole or slit in 
the middle of this mat, as you see the same in South 
American ponchos. But could it be possible that any 
sober harpooneer would get into a door-mat, and parade 
the streets of any Christian town in that sort of guise ? 
I put it on, to try it, and it weighed me down like a hamper, 
being uncommonly shaggy and thick, and I thought a 
little damp, as though this mysterious harpooneer had 
been wearing it of a rainy day. I went up in it to a bit 
of glass stuck against the wall, and I never saw such a 
sight in my life. I tore myself out of it in such a hurry 
that I gave myself a kink in the neck. 

I sat down on the side of the bed, and commenced 



THE SPOUTER-INN 25 

thinking about this head-peddling harpooneer, and his 
door-mat. After thinking some time on the bedside, I 
got up and took off my monkey-jacket, and then stood 
in the middle of the room thinking. I then took off my 
coat, and thought a little more in my shirt -sleeves. But 
beginning to feel very cold now, half undressed as I was, 
and remembering what the landlord said about the har- 
pooneer 's not coming home at all that night, it being so 
very late, I made no more ado, but jumped out of my 
pantaloons and boots, and then blowing out the light 
tumbled into bed, and commended myself to the care of 
heaven. 

Whether that mattress was stuffed with corn-cobs or 
broken crockery, there is no telling, but I rolled about a 
good deal, and could not sleep for a long time. At last 
I slid off into a light doze, and had pretty nearly made a 
good offing toward the land of Nod, when I heard a 
heavy footfall in the passage, and saw a glimmer of light 
come into the room from under the door. 

Lord save me, thinks I, that must be the harpooneer, 
the infemal head-peddler. But I lay perfectly still, and 
resolved not to say a word till spoken to. Holding a 
light in one hand, and that identical New Zealand head 
in the other, the stranger entered the room, and without 
looking toward the bed, placed his candle a good way 
off from me on the floor in one corner, and then began 
working away at the knotted cords of the large bag I 
before spoke of as being in the room. I was all eagerness 
to see his face, but he kept it averted for some time while 
employed in unlacing the bag 's mouth . This accomplished, 
however, he turned round when, good heavens ! what a 
sight ! Such a face ! It was of a dark, purplish, yellow 
colour, here and there stuck over with large, blackish- 
looking squares. Yes, it 's just as I thought, he 's a 
terrible bedfellow ; he 's been in a fight, got dreadfully 



26 MOBY-DICK 

cut, and here he is, just from the surgeon. But at that 
moment he chanced to turn his face so toward the light, 
that I plainly saw they could not be sticking-plasters at 
all, those black squares on his cheeks. They were stains 
of some sort or other. At first I knew not what to make 
of this ; but soon an inkling of the truth occurred to me. 
I remembered a story of a white man a whaleman too 
who, falling among the cannibals, had been tattooed by 
them. I concluded that this harpooneer, in the course of 
his distant voyages, must have met with a similar adven- 
ture. And what is it, thought I, after all ! It 's only 
his outside ; a man can be honest in any sort of skin. 
But then, what to make of his unearthly complexion, 
that part of it, I mean, lying round about, and completely 
independent of the squares of tattooing. To be sure, it 
might be nothing but a good coat of tropical tanning ; 
but I never heard of a hot sun's tanning a white man into 
a purplish-yellow one. However, I had never been in 
the South Seas ; and perhaps the sun there produced 
these extraordinary effects upon the skin. Now, while 
all these ideas were passing through me like lightning, 
this harpooneer never noticed me at all. But, after some 
difficulty having opened his bag, he commenced fumbling 
in it, and presently pulled out a sort of tomahawk, and 
a sealskin wallet with the hair on. Placing these on the 
old chest in the middle of the room, he then took the New 
Zealand head a ghastly thing enough and crammed it 
down into the bag. He now took off his hat a new 
beaver hat when I came nigh singing out with fresh 
surprise. There was no hair on his head none to speak 
of, at least nothing but a small scalp -knot twisted up on 
his forehead. His bald purplish head now looked for 
all the world like a mildewed skull. Had not the^stranger 
stood between me and the door, I would have bolted out 
of it quicker than ever I bolted a dinner. 



THE SPOUTER-INN 27 

Even as it was, I thought something of slipping out 
of the window, but it was the second floor back. I am 
no coward, but what to make of this head-peddling purple 
rascal altogether passed my comprehension. Ignorance, 
js^the parent^QJJear, and being completely nonplussed 
and confounded about the stranger, I confess I was now 
as much afraid of him as if it was the devil himself who 
had thus broken into my room at the dead of night. In 
fact, I was so afraid of him that I was not game enough 
just then to address him, and demand a satisfactory 
answer concerning what seemed inexplicable in him. 

Meanwhile, he continued the business of undressing, 
and at last showed his chest and arms. As I live, these 
covered parts of him were checkered with the same 
squares as his face ; his back, too, was all over the same 
dark squares ; he seemed to have been in a Thirty Years' 
War, and just escaped from it with a sticking-plaster shirt. 
Still more, his very legs were marked, as if a parcel of 
dark green frogs were running up the trunks of young 
palms. It was now quite plain that he must be some 
abominable savage or other shipped aboard of a whale- 
man in the South Seas, and so landed in this Christian 
country. I quaked to think of it. A peddler of heads too 
perhaps the heads of his own brothers. He might take 
a fancy to mine heavens ! look at that tomahawk ! 

But there was no time for shuddering, for now the 
savage went about something that completely fascinated 
my attention, and convinced me that he must indeed be 
a heathen. Going to his heavy grego, or wrapall, or 
dreadnaught, which he had previously hung on a chair, 
he fumbled in the pockets, and produced at length a 
curious little deformed image with a hunch on its back, 
and exactly the colour of a three-days-old Congo baby. 
Remembering the embalmed head, at first I almost 
thought that this black manikin was a real baby pre- 



28 MOBY-DICK 

served in some similar manner. But seeing that it was 
not at all limber, and that it glistened a good deal like 
polished ebony, I concluded that it must be nothing but 
a wooden idol, which indeed it proved to be. For now 
the savage goes up to the empty fire-place, and removing 
the papered fire -board, sets up this little hunchbacked 
image, like a ten-pin, between the andirons. The chimney 
jambs and all the bricks inside were very sooty, so that 
I thought this fire-place made a very appropriate little 
shrine or chapel for his Congo idol. 

I now screwed my eyes hard toward the half-hidden 
image, feeling but ill at ease meantime to see what was 
next to follow. First he takes about a double handful 
of shavings out of his grego pocket, and places them 
carefully before the idol ; then laying a bit of ship -biscuit 
on top and applying the flame from the lamp, he kindled 
<the shavings into a sacrificial blaze. Presently, after 
many hasty snatches into the fire, and still hastier with- 
drawals of his fingers (whereby he seemed to be scorching 
them badly), he at last succeeded in drawing out the 
biscuit ; then blowing off the heat and ashes a little, 
he made a polite offer of it to the little negro. But the 
little devil did not seem to fancy such dry sort of fare at 
all ; he never moved his lips. All these strange antics 
were accompanied by still stranger guttural noises from 
the devotee, who seemed to be praying in a sing-song 
or else singing some pagan psalmody or other, during 
which his face twitched about in the most unnatural 
manner. At last, extinguishing the fire, he took the idol 
up very unceremoniously, and bagged it again in his 
grego pocket as carelessly as if he were a sportsman 
bagging a dead woodcock. 

All these queer proceedings increased my uncomf ortable- 
ness, and seeing him now exhibiting strong symptoms of 
concluding his business operations, and jumping into bed 



THE SPOUTER-INN 29 

with me, I thought it was high time, now or never, before 
the light was put out, to break the spell in which I had 
so long been bound. 

But the interval I spent in deliberating what to say 
was a fatal one. Taking up his tomahawk from the table, 
he examined the head of it for an instant, and then hold- 
ing it to the light, with his mouth at the handle, he puffed 
out great clouds of tobacco smoke. The next moment 
the light was extinguished, and this wild cannibal, toma- 
hawk between his teeth, sprang into bed with me. I 
sang out, I could not help it now ; and giving a sudden 
grunt of astonishment he began feeling me. 

Stammering out something, I knew not what, I rolled 
away from him against the wall, and then conjured him, 
whoever or whatever he might be, to keep quiet, and let 
me get up and light the lamp again. But his guttural 
responses satisfied me at once that he but ill compre- 
hended my meaning. 

' Who-e debel you ? ' he at last said ' you no speak-e, 
dam-me, I kill-e.' And so saying the lighted tomahawk 
began flourishing about me in the dark. 

4 Landlord, for God's sake, Peter Coffin ! ' shouted I. 
' Landlord ! Watch ! Coffin ! Angels ! save me ! ' 

1 Speak-e ! tell-ee me who-ee be, or dam-me, I kill-e ! ' 
again growled the cannibal, while his horrid flourishings 
of the tomahawk scattered the hot tobacco ashes about 
me till I thought my linen would get on fire. But thank 
heaven, at that moment the landlord came into the room 
light in hand, and leaping from the bed I ran up to him. 

4 Don't be afraid now,' said he, grinning again. ' Quee- 
queg here wouldn't harm a hair of your head.' 

' Stop your grinning,' shouted I, ' and why didn't you 
tell me that that infernal harpooneer was a cannibal ? ' 

' I thought ye know'd it ; didn't I tell ye, he was 
a-peddlin' heads around town ? but turn flukes again 



30 MOBY-DICK 

and go to sleep. Queequeg, look here you sabbee me, 
I sabbee you this man sleepe you you sabbee ? ' 

' Me sabbee plenty,' grunted Queequeg, puffing away 
at his pipe and sitting up in bed. 

' You gettee in/ he added, motioning to me with his 
tomahawk, and throwing the clothes to one side. He 
really did this in not only a civil but a really kind and 
charitable way. I stood looking at him a moment. For 
all his tattooings he was on the whole a clean, comely- 
looking cannibal. What 's all this fuss I have been 
making about, thought I to myself the man ? s a human 
being just as I am : he has just as much reason to fear 
me, as I have to be afraid of him. Better sleep with a 
sober cannibal than a drunken Christian. 

'Landlord,' said I, 'tell him to stash his tomahawk 
there, or pipe, or whatever you call it ; tell him to stop 
smoking, in short, and I will turn in with him. But I 
don't fancy having a man smoking in bed with me. It 's 
dangerous. Besides, I ain't insured.' 

This being told to Queequeg, he at once complied, and 
again politely motioned me to get into bed rolling over 
to one side as much as to say, I won't touch a leg of ye. 

' Good night, landlord,' said I, ' you may go.' 

I turned in, and never slept better in my life. 






CHAPTER IV 

THE COUNTERPANE 

UPON waking next morning about daylight, I found 
Queequeg's arm thrown over me in the most loving and 
affectionate manner. You had almost thought I had 
been his wife. The counterpane was of patchwork, full 
of odd little parti-coloured squares and triangles ; and 
this arm of his tattooed all over with an interminable 
Cretan labyrinth of a figure, no two parts of which were 
of one precise shade owing, I suppose, to his keeping 
his arm at sea unmethodically in sun and shade, his 
shirt-sleeves irregularly rolled up at various times 
this same arm of his, I say, looked for all the world like 
a strip of that same patchwork quilt. Indeed, partly 
lying on it as the arm did when I first awoke, I could 
hardly tell it from the quilt, they so blended their hues 
together ; and it was only by the sense of weight and 
pressure that I could tell that Queequeg was hugging me. 
My sensations were strange. Let me try to explain 
them. When I was a child, I well remember a somewhat 
similar circumstance that befell me ; whether it was a 
reality or a dream, I never could entirely settle. The 
circumstance was this. I had been cutting up some 
caper or other I think it was trying to crawl up the 
chimney, as I had seen a little sweep do a few days 
previous ; and my stepmother, who, somehow or other, 
was all the time whipping me, or sending me to bed 
supperless, my mother dragged me by the legs out 
of the chimney and packed me off to bed, though it was 
only two o'clock in the afternoon of the 21st June, the 

31 



32 MOBY-DICK 

longest day in the year in our hemisphere. 1 felt dread- 
fully. But there was no help for it, so upstairs I went 
to my little room in the third floor, undressed myself as 
slowly as possible so as to kill time, and with a bitter 
sigh got between the sheets. 

I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire 
hours must elapse before I could hope for a resurrection. 
Sixteen hours in bed ! the small of my back ached to 
think of it. And it was so light too ; the sun shining 
in at the window, and a great rattling of coaches in the 
streets, and the sound of gay voices all over the house. 
I felt worse and worse at last I got up, dressed, and 
softly going down in my stockinged feet, sought out my 
stepmother, and suddenly threw myself at her feet, be- 
seeching her as a particular favour to give me a good 
slippering for my misbehaviour ; anything indeed but con- 
demning me to lie abed such an unendurable length of 
time. But she was the best and most conscientious of 
stepmothers, and back I had to go to my room. For 
several hours I lay there broad awake, feeling a great 
deal worse than I have ever done since, even from the 
greatest subsequent misfortunes. At last I must have 
fallen into a troubled nightmare of a doze ; and slowly 
waking from it half steeped in dreams I opened my 
eyes, and the before sunlit room was now wrapped in 
outer darkness. Instantly I felt a shock running through 
all my frame ; nothing was to be seen, and nothing was 
to be heard ; but a supernatural hand seemed placed 
in mine. My arm hung over the counterpane, and the 
nameless, unimaginable, silent form or phantom, to which 
the hand belonged, seemed closely seated by my bedside. 
For what seemed ages piled on ages, I lay there, frozen 
with the most awful fears, not daring to drag away my 
hand ; yet ever thinking that if I could but stir it one 
single inch, the horrid spell would be broken. I knew 



THE COUNTERPANE 33 

not how this consciousness at last glided away from me ; 
but waking in the morning, I shudderingly remembered 
it all, and for days and weeks and months afterward I 
lost myself in confounding attempts to explain the mystery. 
Nay, to this very hour, I often puzzle myself with it. 

Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at 
feeling the supernatural hand in mine were very similar, 
in their strangeness, to those which I experienced on 
waking up and seeing Queequeg 's pagan arm thrown 
round me. But at length all the past night's events 
soberly recurred, one by one, in fixed reality, and then I 
lay only alive to the comical predicament. For though 
I tried to move his arm unlock his bridegroom clasp 
yet, sleeping as he was, he still hugged me tightly, as 
though naught but death should part us twain. I now 
strove to rouse him * Queequeg ! ' but his only answer 
was a snore. I then rolled over, my neck feeling as if 
it were in a horse-collar ; and suddenly felt a slight 
scratch. Throwing aside the counterpane, there lay the 
tomahawk sleeping by the savage's side, as if it were a 
hatchet -faced baby. A pretty pickle, truly, thought I ; 
abed here in a strange house in the broad day, with a 
cannibal and a tomahawk ! ' Queequeg ! in the name 
of goodness, Queequeg, wake ! ' At length, by dint of 
much wriggling, and loud and incessant expostulations 
upon the unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow-male in 
that matrimonial sort of style, I succeeded in extracting 
a grunt ; and presently, he drew back his arm, shook 
himself all over like a Newfoundland dog just from the 
water, and sat up in bed, stiff as a pikestaff, looking at 
me, and rubbing his eyes as if he did not altogether re- 
member how I came to be there, though a dim conscious- 
ness of knowing something about me seemed slowly 
dawning over him. Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him, 
having no serious misgivings now, and bent upon narrowly 

VOL. i. c 



34 MOBY-DICK 

observing so curious a creature. When, at last, his mind 
seemed made up touching the character of his bed- 
fellow, and he became, as it were, reconciled to the fact, 
he jumped out upon the floor, and by certain signs and 
sounds gave me to understand that, if it pleased me, he 
would dress first and then leave me to dress afterward, 
leaving the whole apartment to myself. Thinks I, 
Queequeg, under the circumstances, this is a very civilised 
overture ; but, the truth is, these savages have an innate 
sense of delicacy, say what you will ; it is marvellous how 
essentially polite they are. I pay this particular compli- 
ment to Queequeg, because he treated me with so much 
civility and consideration, while I was guilty of great 
rudeness ; staring at him from the bed, and watching all 
his toilet motions ; for the time my curiosity getting the 
better of my breeding. Nevertheless, a man like Quee- 
queg you don't see every day, he and his ways were well 
worth unusual regarding. 

He commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver 
hat, a very tall one, by the by, and then still minus his 
trowsers he hunted up his boots. What under the 
heavens he did it for, I cannot tell, but his next movement 
was to crush himself boots in hand, and hat on under 
the bed ; when, from sundry violent gaspings and strain- 
ings, I inferred he was hard at work booting himself ; 
though by no law of propriety that I ever heard of is 
any man required to be private when putting on his boots. 
But Queequeg, do you see, was a creature in the transi- 
tion state neither caterpillar nor butterfly. He was 
just enough civilised to show off his outlandishness in the 
strangest possible manner. His education was not yet 
completed. He was an undergraduate. If he had not 
been a small degree civilised, he very probably would 
not have troubled himself with boots at all ; but then, 
if he had not been still a savage, he never would have 



THE COUNTERPANE 35 

dreamt of getting under the bed to put them on. At 
last, he emerged with his hat very much dented and 
crushed down over his eyes, and began creaking and 
limping about the room, as if, not being much accustomed 
to boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhide ones pro- 
bably not made to order either rather pinched and 
tormented him at the first go off of a bitter cold morning. 

Seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window, 
and that the street being very narrow, the house opposite 
commanded a plain view into the room, and observing 
more and more the indecorous figure that Queequeg 
made, staving about with little else but his hat and boots 
on, I begged him as well as I could, to accelerate his 
toilet somewhat, and particularly to get into his panta- 
loons as soon as possible. He complied, and then pro- 
ceeded to wash himself. At that time in the morning 
any Christian would have washed his face ; but Queequeg, 
to my amazement, contented himself with restricting 
his ablutions to his chest, arms, and hands. He then 
donned his waistcoat, and taking up a piece of hard soap 
on the wash-stand centre table, dipped it into water and 
commenced lathering his face. I was watching to see 
where he kept his razor, when lo and behold, he takes the 
harpoon from the bed corner, slips out the long wooden 
stock, unsheathes the head, whets it a little on his boot, 
and striding up to the bit of mirror against the wall, 
begins a vigorous scraping, or rather harpooning of his 
cheeks. Thinks I, Queequeg, this is using Rogers's best 
cutlery with a vengeance. Afterward I wondered the 
less at this operation when I came to know of what 
fine steel the head of a harpoon is made, and how 
exceedingly sharp the long straight edges are always kept. 

The rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly 
marched out of the room, wrapped up in his great pilot 
monkey-jacket, and sporting his harpoon like a marshal's 
baton. 



CHAPTER V 

BREAKFAST 

I QUICKLY followed suit, and descending into the bar-room 
accosted the grinning landlord very pleasantly. I 
cherished no malice toward him, though he had been 
skylarking with me not a little in the matter of my 
bedfellow. 

However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and 
rather too scarce a good thing ; the more 's the pity. So, 
if any one man, in his own proper person, afford stuff for 
a good joke to anybody, let him not be backward, but let 
him cheerfully allow himself to spend and be spent in 
that way. And the man that has anything bountifully 
laughable about him, be sure there is more in that man 
than you perhaps think for. 

The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been 
dropping in the night previous, and whom I had not as 
yet had a good look at. They were nearly all whalemen ; 
chief mates, and second mates, and third mates, and sea- 
carpenters, and sea-coopers, and sea-blacksmiths, and 
harpooneers, and ship-keepers ; a brown and brawny 
company, with bosky beards ; an unshorn, shaggy set, 
all wearing monkey-jackets for morning gowns. 

You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had 
been ashore. This young fellow's healthy cheek is like 
a sun-toasted pear in hue, and would seem to smell 
almost as musky ; he cannot have been three days landed 
from his Indian voyage. That man next him looks a 
few shades lighter ; you might say a touch of satinwood 

36 



BREAKFAST 37 

is in him. In the complexion of a third still lingers a 
tropic tawn, but slightly bleached withal ; lie doubtless 
has tarried whole weeks ashore. But who could show a 
cheek like Queequeg ? which, barred with various tints, 
seemed like the Andes' western slope, to show forth in 
one array, contrasting climates, zone by zone. 

' Grub, ho ! ' now cried the landlord, flinging open a 
door, and in we went to breakfast. 

They say that men who have seen the world, thereby 
become quite at ease in manner, quite self-possessed in 
company. Not always, though : Ledyard, the great New 
England traveller, and Mungo Park, the Scotch one ; of 
all men, they possessed the least assurance in the parlour. 
But perhaps the mere crossing of Siberia in a sledge 
drawn by dogs as Ledyard did, or the taking a long solitary 
walk on an empty stomach, in the negro heart of Africa, 
which was the sum of poor Mungo 's performances this 
kind of travel, I say, may not be the very best mode of 
attaining a high social polish. Still, for the most part, 
that sort of thing is to be had anywhere. 

These reflections just here are occasioned by the cir- 
cumstance that after we were all seated at the table, and 
I was preparing to hear some good stories about whaling ; 
to my no small surprise nearly every man maintained a 
profound silence. And not only that, but they looked 
embarrassed. Yes, here were a set of sea-dogs, many of 
whom without the slightest bashfulness had boarded 
great whales on the high seas entire strangers to them 
and duelled them dead without winking ; and yet, here 
they sat at a social breakfast table all of the same calling, 
all of kindred tastes looking round as sheepishly at 
each other as though they had never been out of sight 
of some sheepfold among the Green Mountains. A 
curious sight ; these bashful bears, these timid warrior 
whalemen ! 



38 MOBY-DICK 

But as for Queequeg why, Queequeg sat there among 
them at the head of the table, too, it so chanced as 
cool as an icicle. To be sure, I cannot say much for his 
breeding. His greatest admirer could not have cordially 
justified his bringing his harpoon in to breakfast with him, 
and using it there without ceremony ; reaching over the 
table with it, to the imminent jeopardy of many heads, 
and grappling the beefsteaks toward him. But that 
was certainly very coolly done by him, and everyone 
knows that in most people's estimation, to do anything 
coolly is to do it genteelly. 

We will not speak of all Queequeg's peculiarities here ; 
how he eschewed coffee and hot rolls, and applied his 
undivided attention to beefsteaks, done rare. Enough, 
that when breakfast was over he withdrew like the rest 
into the public room, lighted his tomahawk-pipe, and was 
sitting there quietly digesting and smoking with his 
inseparable hat on, when I sallied out for a stroll. 



CHAPTER VI 

THE STREET 

IF I had been astonished at first catching a glimpse of so 
outlandish an individual as Queequeg circulating among 
the polite society of a civilised town, that astonishment 
soon departed upon taking my first daylight stroll through 
the streets of New Bedford. 

In thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable sea- 
port will frequently offer to view the queerest -looking 
nondescripts from foreign parts. Even in Broadway 
and Chestnut Streets, Mediterranean mariners will some- 
times jostle the affrighted ladies. Regent Street is not 
unknown to Lascars and Malays ; and at Bombay, in the 
Apollo Green, live Yankees have often scared the natives. 
But New Bedford beats all Water Street and Wapping. 
In these last -mentioned haunts you see only sailors ; but 
in New Bedford actual cannibals stand chatting at street 
corners ; savages outright ; many of whom yet carry on 
their bones unholy flesh. It makes a stranger stare. 

But, besides the Feegeeans, Tongatabooarrs, Erro- 
manggoans, Pannangians, and Brighggians, and besides 
the wild specimens of the whaling -craft which unheeded 
reel about the streets, you will see other sights still more 
curious, certainly more comical. There weekly arrive 
in this town scores of green Vermonters and New Hamp- 
shire men, all athirst for gain and glory in the fishery. 
They are mostly young, of stalwart frames ; fellows who 
have felled forests, and now seek to drop the axe and 
snatch the whale-lance. Many are as green as the Green 



40 MOBY-DICK 

Mountains whence they came. In some things you would 
think them but a few hours old. Look there ! that chap 
strutting round the corner. He wears a beaver hat and 
swallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor -belt and a sheath- 
knife. Here comes another with a sou '-wester and a 
bombazine cloak. 

No town-bred dandy will compare with a country-bred 
one I mean a downright bumpkin dandy a fellow that, 
in the dog-days, will mow his two acres in buckskin 
gloves for fear of tanning his hands. Now when a country 
dandy like this takes it into his head to make a distin- 
guished reputation, and joins the great whale-fishery, you 
should see the comical things he does upon reaching the 
seaport. In bespeaking his sea -out fit, he orders bell- 
buttons to his waistcoats ; straps to his canvas trowsers. 
Ah, poor Hay-Seed ! how bitterly will burst those straps 
in the first howling gale, when thou art driven, straps/ 
buttons, and all, down the throat of the tempest. 

But think not that this famous town has only har- 
pooneers, cannibals, and bumpkins to show her visitors. 
Not at all. Still New Bedford is a queer place. Had it 
not been for us whalemen, that tract of land would this 
day perhaps have been in as howling condition as the 
coast of Labrador. As it is, parts of her back country 
are enough to frighten one, they look so bony. The town 
itself is perhaps the dearest place to live in, hi all New 
England. It is a land of oil, true enough : but not like 
Caanan ; a land, also, of corn and wine. The streets do 
not run with milk ; nor in the spring-time do they pave 
them with fresh eggs. Yet, in spite of this, nowhere in 
all America will you find more patrician-like houses ; 
parks and gardens more opulent, than hi New Bedford. 
Whence came they ? how planted upon this once scraggy 
scoria of a country ? 

Go and gaze upon the iron emblematical harpoons 






THE STREET 41 

round yonder lofty mansion, and your question will be 
answered. Yes ; all these brave houses and flowery 
gardens came from the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. 
One and all, they were harpooned and dragged up hither 
from the bottom of the sea. Can Herr Alexander per- 
form a feat like that ? 

In New Bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for 
dowers to their daughters, and portion off their nieces 
with a few porpoises apiece. You must go to New Bed- 
ford to see a brilliant wedding ; for, they say, they have 
reservoirs of oil in every house, and every night recklessly 
burn their lengths in spermaceti candles. 

In summer time, the town is sweet to see ; full of fine 
maples long avenues of green and gold. And in August, 
high in air, the beautiful and bountiful horse-chestnuts, 
candelabra-wise, proffer the passer-by their tapering 
upright cones of congregated blossoms. So omnipotent \ 
is art ; which in many a district of New Bedford has 
superinduced bright terraces of flowers upon the barren 
refuse rocks thrown aside at Creation's final day. 

And the women of New Bedford, they bloom like their 
own red roses. But roses only bloom in summer ; whereas 
the fine carnation of their cheeks is perennial as sunlight 
in the seventh heavens. Elsewhere match that bloom 
of theirs, ye cannot, save in Salem, where they tell me 
the young girls breathe such musk, their sailor sweet- 
hearts smell them miles off shore, as though they were 
drawing nigh the odorous Moluccas instead of the Puritanic 
sands. 



CHAPTER VII 

THE CHAPEL 

IN this same New Bedford there stands a Whaleman's 
Chapel, and few are the moody fishermen, shortly bound 
for the Indian Ocean or Pacific, who fail to make a Sunday 
visit to the spot. I am sure that I did not. 

Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied 
out upon this special errand. The sky had changed from 
clear, sunny cold, to driving sleet and mist. Wrapping 
myself in my shaggy jacket of the cloth called bearskin, 
I fought my way against the stubborn storm. Entering, 
I found a small scattered congregation of sailors, and 
sailors' wives and widows. A muffled silence reigned, 
only broken at times by the shrieks of the storm. Each 
silent worshipper seemed purposely sitting apart from 
the other, as if each silent grief were insular and incom- 
municable. The chaplain had not yet arrived ; and there 
these silent islands of men and women sat steadfastly 
eyeing several marble tablets, with black borders, masoned 
into the wall on either side the pulpit. Three of them 
ran something like the following, but I do not pretend to 
quote : 

SACRED 



OF 

JOHN TALBOT, 

Who, at the age of eighteen, was lost overboard, 

Near the Isle of Desolation, off Patagonia, 

November 1st, 1836. 

THIS TABLET 

Is erected to his Memory 

BY HIS SISTER. 



42 



THE CHAPEL 43 

SACRED 

^o tlje em orp 

OF 

ROBERT LONG, WILLIS ELLERY, 

NATHAN COLEMAN, WALTER CANNY, SETH MACY, 

AND SAMUEL GLEIG, 

Forming one of the boats' crews 
OF 

THE SHIP ELIZA, 

Who were towed out of sight by a Whale, 
On the Ofi-shore Ground in the 

PACIFIC, 
December 3lst, 1839. 

THIS MABBLB 

Is here placed by their surviving 
Shipmates 



SACKED 

Eo tfje 

OF 

The late 

CAPTAIN EZEKIEL HARDY, 

Who in the bows of his boat was killed by a 

Sperm Whale on the coast of Japan, 

August 3d, 1833. 

THIS TABLET 

Is erected to his Memory 
BY 

HIS WIDOW. 

Shaking off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, 
I seated myself near the door, and turning sideways was 
surprised to see Queequeg near me. Affected by the 
solemnity of the scene, there was a wondering gaze of 
incredulous curiosity in his countenance. This savage 
was the only person present who seemed to notice my 
entrance ; because he was the only one who could not 
read, and, therefore, was not reading those frigid inscrip- 
tions on the wall. Whether any of the relatives of the 



44 MOBY-DICK 

seamen whose names appeared there were now among 
the congregation, I knew not ; but so many are the unre- 
corded accidents in the fishery, and so plainly did several 
women present wear the countenance if not the trappings 
of some unceasing grief, that I feel sure that here before 
me were assembled those, in whose unhealing hearts the 
sight of those bleak tablets sympathetically caused the 
old wounds to bleed afresh. 

Oh ! ye whose dead lie buried beneath the green grass ; 
who standing among flowers can say here, here lies my 
beloved ; ye know not the desolation that broods in 
bosoms like these. What bitter blanks in those black- 
bordered marbles which cover no ashes ! What despair 
in those immovable inscriptions ! What deadly voids 
and unbidden infidelities in the lines that seem to gnaw 
upon all Faith, and refuse resurrections to the beings who 
have placelessly perished without a grave. As well might 
those tablets stand in the cave of Elephanta as here. 

Li what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind 
are included ; why it is that a universal proverb says of 
them, that they tell no tales, though containing more 
secrets than the Goodwin Sands ; how it is that to his 
name who yesterday departed for the other world, we 
prefix so significant and infidel a word, and yet do not 
thus entitle him, if he but embarks for the remotest Indies 
of this living earth ; why the Life Insurance Companies 
pay death-forfeitures upon immortals ; in what eternal, 
unstirring paralysis, and deadly, hopeless trance, yet lies 
antique Adam who died sixty round centuries ago ; how 
it is that we still refuse to be comforted for those who we 
nevertheless maintain are dwelling in unspeakable bliss ; 
why all the living so strive to hush all the dead ; wherefore 
but the rumour of a knocking in a tomb will terrify a 
whole city. All these things are not without their 
meanings. 



THE CHAPEL 45 

But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and 
even from these dead doubts she gathers her most vital 
hope. 

It needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the 
eve of a Nantucket voyage, I regarded those marble 
tablets, and by the murky light of that darkened, doleful 
day read the fate of the whalemen who had gone before 
me. Yes, Ishmael, the same fate may be thine. But 
somehow I grew merry again. Delightful inducements to 
embark, fine chance for promotion, it seems ay, a 
stove boat will make me an immortal by brevet. Yes, 
there is death in this business of whaling a speechlessly 
quick chaotic bundling of a man into Eternity. But what 
then ? Methinks we have hugely mistaken this matter 
of Life and Death. Methinks that what they call my 
shadow here on earth is my true substance. Methinks 
that in looking at things spiritual, we are too much like 
oysters observing the sun through the water, and thinking 
that thick water the thinnest of air. Methinks my body 
is but the lees of my better being. In fact, take my body 
who will, take it I say, it is not me. And therefore three 
cheers for Nantucket ; and come a stove boat and stove 
body when they will, for stave my soul, Jove himself 
cannot. 






CHAPTER VIII 

THE PULPIT 

I HAD not been seated very long ere a man of a certain 
venerable robustness entered ; immediately as the storm- 
pelted door flew back upon admitting him, a quick regard- 
ful eyeing of him by all the congregation sufficiently 
attested that this fine old man was the chaplain. Yes, 
it was the famous Father Mapple, so called by the whale- 
men, among whom he was a very great favourite. He 
had been a sailor and a harpooneer in his youth, but for 
many years past had dedicated his life to the ministry. 
At the time I now write of, Father Mapple was in the 
hardy winter of a healthy old age ; that sort of old age 
which seems merging into a second flowering youth, for 
among all the fissures of his wrinkles, there shone certain 
mild gleams of a newly developing bloom the spring 
verdure peeping forth even beneath February's snow. 
No one having previously heard his history, could for 
the first time behold Father Mapple without the utmost 
interest, because there were certain engrafted clerical 
peculiarities about him, imputable to that adventurous 
maritime life he had led. When he entered I observed 
that he carried no umbrella, and certainly had not come 
in his carriage, for his tarpaulin hat ran down with melting 
sleet, and his great pilot-cloth jacket seemed almost to 
drag him to the floor with the weight of the water it had 
absorbed. However, hat and coat and overshoes were 
one by one removed, and hung up in a little space in an 
adjacent corner ; when, arrayed in a decent suit, he 
quietly approached the pulpit. 

46 



THE PULPIT 47 

Like most old-fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, 
and since a regular stairs to such a height would, by its 
long angle with the floor, seriously contract the already 
small area of the chapel, the architect, it seemed, had 
acted upon the hint of Father Mapple, and finished the 
pulpit without a stairs, substituting a perpendicular side 
ladder, like those used in mounting a ship from a boat at 
sea. The wife of a whaling-captain had provided the chapel 
with a handsome pair of red worsted man-ropes for this 
ladder, which, being itself nicely headed, and stained with 
a mahogany colour, the whole contrivance, considering 
what manner of chapel it was, seemed by no means in bad 
taste. Halting for an instant at the foot of the ladder, 
and with both hands grasping the ornamental knobs 
of the man-ropes, Father Mapple cast a look upward, 
and then with a truly sailor-like but still reverential 
dexterity, hand over hand, mounted the steps as if 
ascending the main -top of his vessel. 

The perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually 
the case with swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, 
only the rounds were of wood, so that at every step there 
was a joint. At my first glimpse of the pulpit, it had not 
escaped me that however convenient for a ship, these 
joints in the present instance seemed unnecessary. For 
I was not prepared to see Father Mapple after gaining 
the height, slowly turn round, and stooping over the 
pulpit, deliberately drag up the ladder step by step, till 
the whole was deposited within, leaving him impregnable 
in his little Quebec. 

I pondered some time without fully comprehending 
the reason for this. Father Mapple enjoyed such a wide 
reputation for sincerity and sanctity, that I could not 
suspect him of courting notoriety by any mere tricks of 
the stage. No, thought I, there must be some sober 
reason for this thing ; furthermore, it must symbolise 



48 MOBY-DICK 

something unseen. Can it be, then, that by that act of 
physical isolation, he signifies his spiritual withdrawal for 
the time, from all outward worldly ties and connections ? 
Yes, for replenished with the meat and wine of the word, 
to the faithful man of God, this pulpit, I see, is a self- 
containing stronghold a lofty Ehrenbreitstein, with a 
perennial well of water within the walls. 

But the side ladder was not the only strange feature 
of the place, borrowed from the chaplain's former sea- 
farings. Between the marble cenotaphs on either hand 
of the pulpit, the wall which formed its back was adorned 
with a large painting representing a gallant ship beating 
against a terrible storm off a lee coast of black rocks and 
snowy breakers. But high above the flying scud and 
dark-rolling clouds, there floated a little isle of sunlight, 
from which beamed forth an angel's face ; and this bright 
face shed a distinct spot of radiance upon the ship's tossed 
deck, something like that silver plate now inserted into the 
Victory's plank where Nelson fell. ' Ah, noble ship/ the 
angel seemed to say, 'beat on, beat on, thou noble ship, and 
bear a hardy helm ; for lo ! the sun is breaking through ; 
the clouds are rolling off serenest azure is at hand.' 

Nor was the pulpit itself without a trace of the same 
sea -taste that had achieved the ladder and the picture. 
Its panelled front was in the likeness of a ship's bluff bows, 
and the Holy Bible rested on a projecting piece of scroll 
work, fashioned after a ship's fiddle -headed beak. 

What could be more full of meaning ? for the pulpit 
is ever this earth's foremost part ; all the rest comes in 
its rear ; the pulpit leads the world. From thence it is 
the storm of God's quick wrath is first descried, and the 
bow must bear the earliest brunt. From thence it is the 
God of breezes fair or foul is first invoked for favourable 
winds. Yes, the world 's a ship on its passage out, and 
not a voyage complete ; and the pulpit is its prow. 



CHAPTER IX 



THE SERMON 

FATHER MAPPLE rose, and in a mild voice of unassuming 
authority ordered the scattered people to condense. 
' Starboard gangway, there ! side away to larboard 
larboard gangway to starboard ! Midships ! midships ! ' 

There was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the 
benches, and a still slighter shuffling of women's shoes, 
and all was quiet again, and every eye on the preacher. 

He paused a little ; then kneeling in the pulpit's bows, 
folded his large brown hands across his chest, uplifted 
his closed eyes, and offered a prayer so deeply devout 
that he seemed kneeling and praying at the bottom of 
the sea. 

This ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the continual 
tolling of a bell in a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog 
in such tones he commenced reading the following hymn ; 
but changing his manner toward the concluding stanzas, 
burst forth with a pealing exultation and joy : 

* The ribs and terrors in the whale 

Arched over me a dismal gloom, 
While all God's sun-lit waves rolled by, 
And lift me deepening down to doom. 

' I saw the opening maw of hell, 

With endless pains and sorrows there ; 
Which none but they that feel can tell 
Oh, I was plunging to despair. 

VOL. I. D 



50 MOBY-DICK 

4 In black distress, I called my God, 

When I could scarce believe him mine, 
He bowed his ear to my complaints 
No more the whale did me confine. 

' With speed he flew to my relief, 

As on a radiant dolphin borne ; 
Awful, yet bright, as lightning shone 
The face of my Deliverer God. 

' My song for ever shall record 

That terrible, that joyful hour ; 
I give the glory to my God, 

His all the mercy and the power.' 

Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled 
high above the howling of the storm. A brief pause 
ensued ; the preacher slowly turned over the leaves of 
the Bible, and at last, folding his hand down upon the 
proper page, said : ' Beloved shipmates, clinch the last 
verse of the first chapter of Jonah " And God had pre- 
pared a great fish to swallow up Jonah." 

' Shipmates, this book, containing only four chapters 
four yarns is one of the smallest strands in the mighty 
cable of the Scriptures. Yet what depths of the soul does 
Jonah's deep sea-line sound ! what a pregnant lesson to 
us is this prophet ! What a noble thing is that canticle 
in the fish's belly ! How billow-like and boisterously 
grand ! We feel the floods surging over us ; we sound with 
him to the kelpy bottom of the waters ; sea-weed and all 
the slime of the sea is about us ! But what is this lesson 
that the book of Jonah teaches ? Shipmates, it is a two- 
stranded lesson ; a lesson to us all as sinful men, and a 
lesson to me as a pilot of the living God. As sinful men, 
it is a lesson to us all, because it is a story of the sin, hard- 
heartedness, suddenly awakened fears, the swift punish- ! 



THE SERMON 51 

ment, repentance, prayers, and finally the deliverance and 
joy of Jonah. As with all sinners among men, the sin 
of this son of Amittai was in his wilful disobedience of the 
command of God never mind now what that command 
was, or how conveyed which he found a hard command. 
But all the things that God would have us do are hard for 
us to do remember that and hence, He oftener com- 
mands us than endeavours to persuade. And if we obey 
God, we must disobey ourselves ; and it is in this dis- 
obeying ourselves, wherein the hardness of obeying God 
consists. 

' With this sin of disobedience in him, Jonah still 
further flouts at God, by seeking to flee from Him. He 
thinks that a ship made by men will carry him into 
countries where God does not reign, but only the captains 
of this earth. He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, 
and seeks a ship that 's bound for Tarshish. There lurks, 
perhaps, a hitherto unheeded meaning here. By all 
accounts Tarshish could have been no other city than the 
modern Cadiz. That 's the opinion of learned men. And 
where is Cadiz, shipmates ? Cadiz is in Spain ; as far by 
water, from Joppa, as Jonah could possibly have sailed 
in those ancient days, when the Atlantic was an almost 
unknown sea. Because Joppa, the modern Jaffa, ship- 
mates, is on the most easterly coast of the Mediterranean, 
the Syrian ; and Tarshish or Cadiz more than two thousand 
miles to the westward from that, just outside the Straits 
of Gibraltar. See ye not then, shipmates, that Jonah 
sought to flee world- wide from God ? Miserable man ! 
Oh ! most contemptible and worthy of all scorn ; with 
slouched hat and guilty eye, skulking from his God ; 
prowling among the shipping like a vile burglar hastening 
to cross the seas. So disordered, self -condemning is his 
look, that had there been policemen in those days, Jonah, 
on the mere suspicion of something wrong, had been 



52 MOBY-DICK 

arrested ere he touched a deck. How plainly he 's a 
fugitive ! no baggage, not a hat-box, valise, or carpet- 
bag, no friends accompany him to the wharf with their 
adieux. At last, after much dodging search, he finds the 
Tarshish ship receiving the last items of her cargo ; and 
as he steps on board to see its captain in the cabin, all 
the sailors for the moment desist from hoisting in the 
goods, to mark the stranger's evil eye. Jonah sees this ; 
but in vain he tries to look ah 1 ease and confidence ; in 
vain essays his wretched smile. Strong intuitions of the 
man assure the mariners he can be no innocent. In their 
gamesome but still serious way, one whispers to the other 
" Jack, he 's robbed a widow " ; or, " Joe, do you mark 
him ; he 's a bigamist " ; or, " Harry, lad, I guess he 's the 
adulterer that broke jail in old Gomorrah, or belike, one 
of the missing murderers from Sodom." Another runs 
to read the bill that 's stuck against the spile upon the 
wharf to which the ship is moored, offering five hundred 
gold coins for the apprehension of a. parricide, and con- 
taining a description of his person. He reads, and looks 
from Jonah to the bill ; while all his sympathetic ship- 
mates now crowd round Jonah, prepared to lay their 
hands upon him. Frighted Jonah trembles, and summon- 
ing all his boldness to his face, only looks so much the 
more a coward. He will not confess himself suspected ; 
but that itself is strong suspicion. So he makes the best 
of it ; and when the sailors find him not to be the man that 
is advertised, they let him pass, and he descends into the 
cabin. 

' " Who 's there ? " cries the captain at his busy desk, 
hurriedly making out his papers for the Customs "Who 's 
there ? " Oh ! how that harmless question mangles 
Jonah ! For the instant he almost turns to flee again. 
But he rallies. " I seek a passage in this ship to Tarshish ; 
how soon sail ye, sir ? " Thus far the busy captain had 



THE SERMON 53 

not looked up to Jonah, though the man now stands 
before him ; but no sooner does he hear that hollow voice, 
than he darts a scrutinising glance. " We sail with the 
next coming tide," at last he slowly answered, still 
intently eyeing him. " No sooner, sir ? " " Soon enough 
for any honest man that goes a passenger." Ha ! Jonah, 
that 's another stab. But he swiftly calls away the 
captain from that scent. " I '11 sail with ye," he says, 
" the passage money, how much is that ? I '11 pay 
now." For it is particularly written, shipmates, as if it 
were a thing not to be overlooked in this history, " that 
he paid the fare thereof " ere the craft did sail. And 
taken with the context, this is full of meaning. 

' Now Jonah's captain, shipmates, was one whose dis- 
cernment detects crime in any, but whose cupidity exposes 
it only in the penniless. In this world, shipmates, sin 
that pays its way can travel freely, and without a pass- 
port ; whereas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at all 
frontiers. So Jonah's captain prepares to test the length 
of Jonah's purse, ere he judge him openly. He charges 
him thrice the usual sum ; and it 's assented to. Then 
the captain knows that Jonah is a fugitive ; but at the 
same time resolves to help a flight that paves its rear with 
gold. Yet when Jonah fairly takes out his purse, prudent 
suspicions still molest the captain. He rings every coin 
to find a counterfeit. Not a forger, anyway, he mutters ; 
and Jonah is put down for his passage. " Point out my 
state-room, sir," says Jonah now, " I 'm travel- weary ; 
I need sleep." "Thou look'st like it," says the captain, 
" there 's thy room." Jonah enters, and would lock the 
door, but the lock contains no key. Hearing him foolishly 
fumbling there, the captain laughs lowly to himself, and 
mutters something about the doors of convicts' cells being 
never allowed to be locked within. All dressed and dusty 
as he is, Jonah throws himself into his berth, and finds 



54 MOBY-DICK 

the little state-room ceiling almost resting on his forehead. 
The air is close, and Jonah gasps. Then, in that con- 
tracted hole, sunk, too, beneath the ship's water-line, 
Jonah feels the heralding presentiment of that stifling 
hour, when the whale shall hold him in the smallest of 
his bowel's wards. 

' Screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp 
slightly oscillates in Jonah's room ; and the ship, heeling 
over toward the wharf with the weight of the last bales 
received, the lamp, flame and all, though in slight motion, 
still maintains a permanent obliquity with reference to 
the room ; though, in truth, infallibly straight itself, it 
but made obvious the false, lying levels among which it 
hung. The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah ; as lying 
in his berth his tormented eyes roll round the place, and 
this thus far successful fugitive finds no refuge for his 
restless glance. But that contradiction in the lamp more 
and more appals him. The floor, the ceiling, and the 
side, are all awry. " Oh ! so my conscience hangs in 
me ! " he groans, " straight upward, so it burns ; but the 
chambers of my soul are all in crookedness ! " 

' Like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies 
to his bed, still reeling, but with conscience yet pricking 
him, as the plungings of the Roman race -horse but so 
much the more strike his steel tags into him ; as one who 
in that miserable plight still turns and turns in giddy 
anguish, praying God for annihilation until the fit be 
passed ; and at last amid the whirl of woe he feels, a deep 
stupor steals over him, as over the man who bleeds to 
death, for conscience is the wound, and there 's naught 
to staunch it ; so, after sore wrestlings in his berth, 
Jonah's prodigy of ponderous misery drags him drowning 
down to sleep. 

c And now the time of tide has come ; the ship casts 
off her cables ; and from the deserted wharf the un- 



THE SERMON 55 

cheered ship for Tarshish, all careening, glides to sea. 
That ship, my friends, was the first of recorded smugglers ! 
the contraband was Jonah. But the sea rebels ; he will 
not bear the wicked burden. A dreadful storm comes on, 
the ship is like to break. But now when the boatswain 
calls all hands to lighten her ; when boxes, bales, and 
jars are clattering overboard ; when the wind is shrieking, 
and the men are yelling, and every plank thunders with 
trampling feet right over Jonah's head ; in all this raging 
tumult, Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep. He sees no black 
sky and raging sea, feels not the reeling timbers, and little 
hears he or heeds he the far rush of the mighty whale, 
which even now with open mouth is cleaving the seas 
after him. Ay, shipmates, Jonah was gone down into 
the sides of the ship a berth in the cabin as I have taken 
it and was fast asleep. But the frightened master comes 
to him, and shrieks hi his dead ear, " What meanest thou, 
sleeper ! arise ! " Startled from his lethargy by that 
direful cry, Jonah staggers to his feet, and stumbling to 
the deck, grasps a shroud, to look out upon the sea. But 
at that moment he is sprung upon by a panther billow 
leaping over the bulwarks. Wave after wave thus leaps 
into the ship, and finding no speedy vent runs roaring 
fore and aft, till the mariners come nigh to drowning 
while yet afloat. And ever, as the white moon shows her 
affrighted face from the steep gullies in the blackness 
overhead, aghast Jonah sees the rearing bowsprit pointing 
high upward, but soon beat downward again toward the 
tormented deep. 

' Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul. 
In all his cringing attitudes, the God-fugitive is now too 
plainly known. The sailors mark him ; more and more 
certain grow their suspicions of him, and at last, fully 
to test the truth, by referring the whole matter to high 
Heaven, they fall to casting lots, to see for whose cause 



56 MOBY-DICK 

this great tempest was upon them. The lot is Jonah's ; 
that discovered, then how furiously they mob him with 
their questions. " What is thine occupation ? Whence 
comest thou ? Thy country ? What people ? " But 
mark now, my shipmates, the behaviour of poor Jonah. 
The eager mariners but ask him who he is, and where 
from ; whereas, they not only receive an answer to those 
questions, but likewise another answer to a question not 
put by them, but the unsolicited answer is forced from 
Jonah by the hard hand of God that is upon him. 

' " I am a Hebrew," he cries and then " I fear the 
Lord the God of Heaven who hath made the sea and the 
dry land ! " Fear him, O Jonah ? Ay, well mightest 
thou fear the Lord God then ! Straightway, he now goes 
on to make a full confession ; whereupon the mariners 
became more and more appalled, but still are pitiful. 
For when Jonah, not yet supplicating God for mercy, 
since he but too well knew the darkness of his deserts, 
when wretched Jonah cries out to them to take him and 
cast him forth into the sea, for he knew that for his sake 
this great tempest was upon them ; they mercifully turn 
from him, and seek by other means to save the ship. 
But all in vain ; the indignant gale howls louder ; then, 
with one hand raised invokingly to God, with the other 
they not unreluctantly lay hold of Jonah. 

' And now behold Jonah taken up as an anchor and 
dropped into the sea ; when instantly an oily calmness 
floats out from the east, and the sea is still, as Jonah 
carries down the gale with him, leaving smooth water 
behind. He goes down in the whirling heart of such a 
masterless commotion that he scarce heeds the moment 
when he drops seething into the yawning jaws awaiting 
him ; and the whale shoots-to all his ivory teeth, like so 
many white bolts, upon his prison. Then Jonah prayed 
unto the Lord out of the fish's belly. But observe his 



THE SERMON 57 

prayer, and learn a weighty lesson. For sinful as he is, 
Jonah does not weep and wail for direct deliverance. 
He feels that his dreadful punishment is just. He leaves 
all his deliverance to God, contenting himself with this, 
that spite of all his pains and pangs, he will still look 
toward His holy temple. And here, shipmates, is true 
and faithful repentance ; not clamorous for pardon, but 
grateful for punishment. And how pleasing to God was 
this conduct in Jonah, is shown in the eventual deliver- 
ance of him from the sea and the whale. Shipmates, I 
do not place Jonah before you to be copied for his sin, 
but I do place him before you as a model for repentance. 
Sin not ; but if you do, take heed to repent of it like Jonah. ' 

While he was speaking these words, the howling of the 
shrieking, slanting storm without seemed to add new 
power to the preacher, who, when describing Jonah's sea- 
storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself. His deep chest 
heaved as with a ground-swell ; his tossed arms seemed 
the warring elements at work ; and the thunders that 
rolled away from off his swarthy brow, and the light 
leaping from his eye, made all his simple hearers look on 
him with a quick fear that was strange to them. 

There now came a lull in his look, as he silently turned 
over the leaves of the Book once more ; and, at last, 
standing motionless, with closed eyes, for the moment, 
seemed communing with God and himself. 

But again he leaned over toward the people, and 
bowing his head lowly, with an aspect of the deepest 
yet manliest humility, he spake these words : 

c Shipmates, God has laid but one hand upon you ; 
both his hands press upon me. I have read ye by what 
murky light may be mine the lesson that Jonah teaches 
to all sinners ; and therefore to ye, and still more to me, 
for I am a greater sinner than ye. And now how gladly 
would I come down from this mast-head and sit on the 



58 MOBY-DICK 

hatches there where you sit, and listen as you listen, 
while some one of you reads me that other and more 
awful lesson which Jonah teaches to me, as a pilot of the 
living God. How being an anointed pilot -prophet, or 
speaker of true things, and bidden by the Lord to sound 
those unwelcome truths in the ears of a wicked Nineveh, 
Jonah, appalled at the hostility he should raise, fled from 
his mission, and sought to escape his duty and his God by 
taking ship at Joppa. But God is everywhere ; Tarshish 
he never reached. As we have seen, God came upon him 
in the whale, and swallowed him down to living gulfs 
of doom, and with swift slantings tore him along " into 
the midst of the seas," where the eddying depths sucked 
him ten thousand fathoms down, and " the weeds were 
wrapped about his head," and all the watery world of woe 
bowled over him. Yet even then beyond the reach of any 
plummet " out of the belly of hell " when the whale 
grounded upon the ocean's utmost bones, even then, God 
heard the engulphed, repenting prophet when he cried. 
Then God spake unto the fish ; and from the shuddering 
cold and blackness of the sea, the whale came breaching 
up toward the warm and pleasant sun, and all the delights 
of air and earth ; and " vomited out Jonah upon the dry 
land " ; when the word of the Lord came a second time ; 
and Jonah, bruised and beaten his ears, like two sea- 
shells, still multitudinously murmuring of the ocean 
Jonah did the Almighty's bidding. And what was that, 
shipmates ? To preach the Truth to the face of False- 
hood ! That was it ! 

' This, shipmates, this is that other lesson ; and we 
to that pilot of the living God who slights it. Woe to 
him whom this world charms from Gospel duty ! Woe 
to him who seeks to pour oil upon the waters when God 
has brewed them into a gale ! Woe to him who seeks 
to please rather than to appal ! Woe to him whose good 



THE SERMON 59 

name is more to him than goodness ! Woe to him who, 
in this world, courts not dishonour ! Woe to him who 
would not be true, even though to be false were salva- 
tion ! Yea, woe to him who, as the great Pilot Paul has 
it, while preaching to others is himself a castaway ! ' 

He drooped and fell away from himself for a moment ; 
then lifting his face to them again, showed a deep joy 
in his eyes, as he cried out with a heavenly enthusiasm, 
' But oh ! shipmates ! on the starboard hand of every 
woe, there is a sure delight ; and higher the top of that 
delight, than the bottom of the woe is deep. Is not the 
main-truck higher than the kelson is low ? Delight is to 
him a far, far upward, and inward delight who against 
the proud gods and commodores of this earth, ever stands 
forth his own inexorable self. Delight is to him whose 
strong arms yet support him, when the ship of this base 
treacherous world has gone down beneath him. Delight 
is to him, who gives no quarter in the truth, and kills, 
burns, and destroys all sin though he pluck it out from 
under the robes of Senators and Judges. Delight, top- 
gallant delight is to him, who acknowledges no law or 
lord, but the Lord his God, and is only a patriot to heaven. 
Delight is to him, whom all the waves of the billows of 
the seas of the boisterous mob can never shake from this 
sure Keel of the Ages. And eternal delight and delicious- 
ness will be his, who coming to lay him down, can say with 
his final breath Father ! chiefly known to me by 
Thy rod mortal or immortal, here I die. I have striven 
to be Thine, more than to be this world's, or mine own. 
Yet this is nothing ; I leave eternity to Thee ; for what 
is man that he should live out the lifetime of his God 1 ' 

He said no more, but slowly waving a benediction, 
covered his face with his hands, and so remained kneeling, 
till all the people had departed, and he was left alone in 
the place. 



CHAPTER X 

A BOSOM FRIEND 

RETURNING to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found 
Queequeg there quite alone ; he having left the Chapel 
before the benediction some time. He was sitting on a 
bench before the fire, with his feet on the stove hearth, 
and in one hand was holding close up to his face that 
little negro idol of his ; peering hard into its face, and 
with a jack-knife gently whittling away at its nose, 
meanwhile humming to himself in his heathenish way. 

But being now interrupted, he put up the image ; and 
pretty soon, going to the table, took up a large book there, 
and placing it on his lap began counting the pages with 
deliberate regularity ; at every fiftieth page as I fancied 
stopping a moment, looking vacantly around him, 
and giving utterance to a long-drawn gurgling whistle 
of astonishment. He would then begin again at the next 
fifty ; seeming to commence at number one each time, 
as though he could not count more than fifty, and it 
was only by such a large number of fifties being found 
together, that his astonishment at the multitude of pages 
was excited. 

With much interest I sat watching him. Savage 
though he was, and hideously marred about the face 
at least to my taste his countenance yet had a something 
in it which was by no means disagreeable. You cannot 
hide the soul. Through all his unearthly tattooings, I 
thought I saw the traces of a simple honest heart ; and 
in his large, deep eyes, fiery black and bold, there seemed 

60 



A BOSOM FRIEND 61 

tokens of a spirit that would dare a thousand devils. 
And besides all this, there was a certain lofty bearing 
about the pagan, which even his uncouthness could not 
altogether maim. He looked like a man who had never 
cringed and never had had a creditor. Whether it was, 
too, that his head being shaved, his forehead was drawn 
out in freer and brighter relief, and looked more expansive 
than it otherwise would, this I will not venture to decide ; 
but certain it was his head was phrenologically an ex- 
cellent one. It may seem ridiculous, but it reminded me 
of General Washington's head, as seen in the popular 
busts of him. It had the same long regularly graded 
retreating slope from above the brows, which were like- 
wise very projecting, like two long promontories thickly 
wooded on top. Queequeg was George Washington 
cannibalistically developed. 

Whilst I was thus closely scanning him, half pretending 
meanwhile to be looking out at the storm from the case- 
ment, he never heeded my presence, never troubled him- 
self with so much as a single glance ; but appeared wholly 
occupied with counting the pages of the marvellous book. 
Considering how sociably we had been sleeping together 
the night previous, and especially considering the affection- 
ate arm I had found thrown over me upon waking in the 
morning, I thought this indifference of his very strange. 
But savages are strange beings ; at times you do not 
know exactly how to take them. At first they are over- 
awing ; their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems 
a Socratic wisdom. I had noticed also that Queequeg 
never consorted at all, or but very little, with the other 
seamen in the inn. He made no advances whatever ; 
appeared to have no desire to enlarge the circle of his 
acquaintances. All this struck me as mighty singular ; 
yet, upon second thoughts, there was something almost 
sublime in it. Here was a man some twenty thousand 



I 



62 MOBY-DICK 

miles from home, by the way of Cape Horn, that is 
which was the only way he could get there thrown 
among people as strange to him as though he were in the 
planet Jupiter ; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease ; 
preserving the utmost serenity ; content with his own 
companionship ; always equal to himself. Surely this 
was a touch of fine philosophy ; though no doubt he had 
never heard there was such a thing as that. But, per- 
haps, to be true philosophers, we mortals should not 
be conscious of so living or so striving. So soon as I 
hear that such or such a man gives himself out for a 
philosopher, I conclude that, like the dyspeptic old woman, 
he must have ' broken his digester.' 

As I sat there in that now lonely room ; the fire burn- 
ing low, in that mild stage when, after its first intensity 
has warmed the air, it then only glows to be looked at ; 
the evening shades and phantoms gathering round the 
casements, and peering in upon us silent, solitary twain ; 
the storm booming without in solemn swells ; I began to 
be sensible of strange feelings. I felt a melting in me. 
No more my splintered heart and maddened hand were 
turned against the wolfish world. This soothing savage 
had redeemed it. There he sat, his very indifference 
speaking a nature in which there lurked no civilised 
hypocrisies and bland deceits. Wild he was ; a very 
sight of sights to see ; yet I began to feel myself mysteri- 
ously drawn toward him. And those same things that 
would have repelled most others, they were the very 
magnets that thus drew me. 1 11 try a pagan friend, 
thought I, since Christian kindness has proved but hollow 
courtesy. I drew my bench near him, and made some 
friendly signs and hints, doing my best to talk with him 
meanwhile. At first he little noticed these advances ; 
but presently, upon my referring to his last night's 
hospitalities, he made out to ask me whether we were 



A BOSOM FRIEND 



63 



again to be bedfellows. I told him yes ; whereat I 
thought he looked pleased, perhaps a little complimented. 

We then turned over the book together, and I en- 
deavoured to explain to him the purpose of the printing, 
and the meaning of the few pictures that were in it. Thus 
I soon engaged his interest ; and from that we went to 
jabbering the best we could about the various outer sights 
to be seen in this famous town. Soon I proposed a social 
smoke ; and, producing his pouch and tomahawk, he 
quietly offered me a puff. And then we sat exchanging 
puffs from that wild pipe of his, and keeping it regularly 
passing between us. 

If there yet lurked any ice of indifference toward me 
in the pagan's breast, this pleasant, genial smoke we had 
soon thawed it out, and left us cronies. He seemed to 
take to me quite as naturally and unbiddenly as I to him ; 
and when our smoke was over, he pressed his forehead 
against mine, clasped me round the waist, and said that 
henceforth we were married ; meaning, in his country's 
phrase, that we were bosom friends ; he would gladly 
die for me, if need should be. In a countryman this 
sudden flame of friendship would have seemed far too 
premature, a thing to be much distrusted ; but in this 
simple savage those old rules would not apply. 

After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we 
went to our room together. He made me a present of 
his embalmed head ; took out his enormous tobacco 
wallet, and groping under the tobacco, drew out some 
thirty dollars in silver ; then spreading them on the 
table, and mechanically dividing them into two equal 
portions, pushed one of them toward me, and said it was 
mine. I was going to remonstrate ; but he silenced me 
by pouring them into my trowsers' pockets. I let them 
stay. He then went about his evening prayers, took 
out his idol, and removed the paper fire-board. By 



64 MOBY-DICK 

certain signs and symptoms, I thought he seemed anxious 
for me to join him ; but well knowing what was to follow, 
I deliberated a moment whether, in case he invited me, 
I would comply or otherwise. 

I was a good Christian ; born and bred in the bosom 
of the infallible Presbyterian Church. How then could 
I unite with this wild idolater in worshipping his piece of 
wood ? But what is worship ? thought I. Do you 
suppose now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of 
heaven and earth pagans and all included can possibly 
be jealous of an insignificant bit of black wood ? Im- 
possible ! But what is worship ? to do the will of 
God ? that is worship. And what is the will of God ? 
to do to my fellow-man what I would have my fellow-man 
to do to me that is the will of God. Now, Queequeg is 
my fellow- man. And what do I wish that this Queequeg 
would do to me ? Why, unite with me in my particular 
Presbyterian form of worship. Consequently, I must 
then unite with him in his ; ergo, I must turn idolater. 
So I kindled the shavings ; helped prop up the innocent 
little idol ; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg ; 
salaamed before him twice or thrice ; kissed his nose ; 
and that done, we undressed and went to bed, at peace 
with our own consciences and all the world. But we 
did not go to sleep without some little chat. 

How it is I know not ; but there is no place like a bed 
for confidential disclosures between friends. Man and 
wife, they say, there open the very bottom of their souls 
to each other ; and some old couples often lie and chat 
over old times till nearly morning. Thus, then, in our 
hearts' honeymoon, lay I and Queequeg a cosy, loving 
pair. 



CHAPTER XI 

NIGHTGOWN 

WE had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short 
intervals, and Queequeg now and then affectionately 
throwing his brown tattooed legs over mine, and then 
drawing them back ; so entirely sociable and free and easy 
were we ; when, at last, by reason of our confabulations, 
what little nappishness remained in us altogether departed, 
and we felt like getting up again, though day-break was 
yet some way down the future. 

Yes, we became very wakeful ; so much so that our 
recumbent position began to grow wearisome, and by 
little and little we found ourselves sitting up ; the clothes 
well tucked around us, leaning against the head-board 
with our four knees drawn up close together, and our two 
noses bending over them, as if our knee-pans were warm- 
ing-pans. We felt very nice and snug, the more so since 
it was so chilly out of doors ; indeed out of bed-clothes 
too, seeing that there was no fire in the room. The more 
so, I say, because truly to enjoy bodily warmth, some 
small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality 
in this world that is not what it is merely by contrast. 
Nothing exists in itself. If you flatter yourself that you 
are all over comfortable, and have been so a long time, 
then you cannot be said to be comfortable any more. 
But if, like Queequeg and me in the bed, the tip of your 
nose or the crown of your head be slightly chilled, why 
then, indeed, in the general consciousness you feel most 
delightfully and unmistakably warm. For this reason 

VOL. i. E 



66 MOBY-DICK 

a sleeping apartment should never be furnished with a 
fire, which is one of the luxurious discomforts of the rich. 
For the height of this sort of deliciousness is to have 
nothing but the blanket between you and your snugness 
and the cold of the outer air. Then there you lie 
like the one warm spark in the heart of an arctic 
crystal. 

We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some 
time, when all at once I thought I would open my eyes ; 
for when between sheets, whether by day or by night, 
and whether asleep or awake, I have a way of always 
keeping my eyes shut, in order the more to concentrate 
the snugness of being in bed. Because no man can ever 
feel his own identity aright except his eyes be closed ; as 
if darkness were indeed the proper element of our essences, 
though light be more congenial to our clayey part. Upon 
opening my eyes then, and coming out of my own pleasant 
and self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse 
outer gloom of the unilluminated twelve-o'clock-at-night, 
I experienced a disagreeable revulsion. Nor did I at all 
object to the hint from Queequeg that perhaps it were best 
to strike a light, seeing that we were so wide awake ; and 
besides he felt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs 
from his tomahawk. Be it said, that though I had felt 
such a strong repugnance to his smoking in the bed the 
night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow 
when love once comes to bend them. For now I liked 
nothing better than to have Queequeg smoking by me, 
even in bed, because he seemed to be full of such serene 
household joy then. I no more felt unduly concerned 
for the landlord's policy of insurance. I was only alive 
to the condensed confidential comfortableness of sharing 
a pipe and a blanket with a real friend. With our shaggy 
jackets drawn about our shoulders, we now passed the 
tomahawk from one to the other, till slowly there grew 



NIGHTGOWN 67 

over us a blue hanging tester of smoke, illuminated by 
the flame of the new-lit lamp. 

Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the 
savage away to far distant scenes, I know not, but he now 
spoke of his native island ; and, eager to hear his history, 
I begged him to go on and tell it. He gladly complied. 
Though at the time I but ill comprehended not a few of 
his words, yet subsequent disclosures, when I had become 
more familiar with his broken phraseology, now enable 
me to present the whole story such as it may prove in 
the mere skeleton I give. 



CHAPTER XII 

BIOGRAPHICAL 

QUEEQUEG was a native of Rokovoko, an island far away 
to the west and south. It is not down in any map ; true 
places never are. 

When a new-hatched savage running wild about his 
native woodlands in a grass clout, followed by the nib- 
bling goats, as if he were a green sapling ; even then, in 
Queequeg's ambitious soul, lurked a strong desire to see 
something more of Christendom than a specimen whaler 
or two. His father was a High Chief, a King ; his uncle 
a High Priest ; and on the maternal side he boasted aunts 
who were the wives of unconquerable warriors. There 
was excellent blood in his veins royal stuff ; though 
sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibal propensity he 
nourished in his untutored youth. 

A Sag Harbour ship visited his father's bay, and Quee- 
queg sought a passage to Christian lands. But the ship, 
having her full complement of seamen, spurned his suit ; 
and not all the King his father's influence could prevail. 
But Queequeg vowed a vow. Alone in his canoe, he 
paddled off to a distant strait, which he knew the ship 
must pass through when she quitted the island. On one 
side was a coral reef ; on the other a low tongue of land, 
covered with mangrove thickets that grew out into the 
water. Hiding his canoe, still afloat, among these thickets, 
with its prow seaward, he sat down in the stern, paddle 
low in hand ; and when the ship was gliding by, like a 
flash he darted out ; gained her side ; with one backward 

68 



BIOGRAPHICAL 69 

dash of his foot capsized and sank his canoe ; climbed 
up the chains ; and throwing himself at full length upon 
the deck, grappled a ring-bolt there, and swore not to let 
it go, though hacked in pieces. 

In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard ; 
suspended a cutlass over his naked wrists ; Queequeg was 
the son of a King, and Queequeg budged not. Struck 
by his desperate dauntlessness, and his wild desire to visit 
Christendom, the captain at last relented, and told him 
he might make himself at home. But this fine young 
savage this sea Prince of Wales never saw the captain's 
cabin. They put him down among the sailors, and made 
a whaleman of him. But like Czar Peter content to toil 
in the shipyards of foreign cities, Queequeg disdained no 
seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happily gain the 
power of enlightening his untutored countrymen. For at 
bottom so he told me he was actuated by a profound 
desire to learn among the Christians, the arts whereby 
to make his people still happier than they were ; and more 
than that, still better than they were. But, alas ! the 
\ practices of whalemen soon convinced him that even 
j Christians could be both miserable and wicked ; infinitely 
more so, than all his father's heathens. Arrived at last 
in old Sag Harbour ; and seeing what the sailors did 
there ; and then going on to Nantucket, and seeing how 
they spent their wages in that place also, poor Queequeg 
gave it up for lost. Thought he, it 5 s a wicked world 
in all meridians ; 1 11 die a pagan. 

And thus an old idolater at heart, he yet lived among 
these Christians, wore their clothes, and tried to talk their 
gibberish. Hence the queer ways about him, though 
now some time from home. 

By hints, I asked him whether he did not propose going 
back, and having a coronation ; since he might now 
consider his father dead and gone, he being very old and 



70 MOBY-DICK 

feeble at the last accounts. He answered no, not yet ; 
and added that he was fearful Christianity, or rather 
Christians, had unfitted him for ascending the pure and 
undefiled throne of thirty pagan kings before him. But 
by and by, he said, he would return, as soon as he felt 
himself baptized again. For the nonce, however, he 
proposed to sail about, and sow his wild oats in all four 
oceans. They had made a harpooneer of him, and that 
barbed iron was in lieu of a sceptre now. 

I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, 
touching his future movements. He answered, to go to 
sea again, in his old vocation. Upon this, I told him that 
whaling was my own design, and informed him of my 
intention to sail out of Nantucket, as being the most 
promising port for an adventurous whaleman to embark 
from. He at once resolved to accompany me to that 
island, ship aboard the same vessel, get into the same 
watch, the same boat, the same mess with me, in short 
to share my every hap ; with both my hands in his, boldly 
dip into the Potluck of both worlds. To all this I joy- 
ously assented ; for besides the affection I now felt for 
Queequeg, he was an experienced harpooneer, and as such, 
could not fail to be of great usefulness to one who, like me, 
was wholly ignorant of the mysteries of whaling, though 
well acquainted with the sea as known to merchant 
seamen. 

His story being ended with his pipe's last dying puff, 
Queequeg embraced me, pressed his forehead against 
mine, and blowing out the light, we rolled over from each 
other, this way and that, and very soon were sleeping. 



CHAPTER XIII 

WHEELBARROW 

NEXT morning, Monday, after disposing of the embalmed 
head to a barber, for a block, I settled my own and com- 
rade's bill ; using, however, my comrade's money. The 
grinning landlord, as well as the boarders, seemed amaz- 
ingly tickled at the sudden friendship which had sprung 
up between me and Queequeg especially as Peter Coffin's 
cock-and-bull stories about him had previously so much 
alarmed me concerning the very person whom I now 
companied with. 

We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our 
things, including my own poor carpet-bag, and Quee- 
queg 's canvas sack and hammock, away we went down to 
the Moss, the little Nantucket packet schooner moored 
at the wharf. As we were going along the people stared ; 
not at Queequeg so much for they were used to seeing 
cannibals like him in their streets, but at seeing him 
and me upon such confidential terms. But we heeded 
them not, going along wheeling the barrow by turns, 
and Queequeg now and then stopping to adjust the sheath 
on his harpoon barbs. I asked him why he carried such 
a troublesome thing with him ashore, and whether all 
whaling-ships did not find their own harpoons. To this, 
in substance, he replied, that though what I hinted was 
true enough, yet he had a particular affection for his own 
harpoon, because it was of assured stuff, well tried in 
many a mortal combat, and deeply intimate with the 
hearts of whales. In short, like many inland reapers and 

71 



72 MOBY-DICK 

mowers, who go into the farmer's meadows armed with 
their own scythes though in no wise obliged to furnish 
them even so, Queequeg, for his own private reasons, 
preferred his own harpoon. 

Shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me 
a funny story about the first wheelbarrow he had ever 
seen. It was in Sag Harbour. The owners of his ship, 
it seems, had lent him one, in which to carry his heavy 
chest to his boarding-house. Not to seem ignorant about 
the thing though in truth he was entirely so, concerning 
the precise way in which to manage the barrow Quee- 
queg puts his chest upon it ; lashes it fast ; and then 
shoulders the barrow and marches up the wharf. ' Why/ 
said I, ' Queequeg, you might have known better than 
that, one would think. Didn't the people laugh ? ' 

Upon this, he told me another story. The people 
of his island of Rokovoko, it seems, at their wedding 
feasts express the fragrant water of young cocoa-nuts into 
a large stained calabash like a punch -bowl ; and this 
punch -bowl always forms the great central ornament on 
the braided mat where the feast is held. Now a certain 
grand merchant ship once touched at Rokovoko, and its 
commander from all accounts a very stately punctilious 
gentleman, at least for a sea-captain this commander 
was invited to the wedding feast of Queequeg 's sister, a 
pretty young princess just turned of ten. Well ; when all 
the wedding guests were assembled at the bride's bamboo 
cottage, this captain marches in, and being assigned the 
post of honour, placed himself over against the punch- 
bowl, and between the High Priest and his majesty the 
King, Queequeg 's father. Grace being said, for those 
people have their grace as well as we though Queequeg 
told me that unlike us, who at such times look downward 
to our platters, they, on the contrary, copying the ducks, 
glance upward to the great Giver of all feasts Grace, 



WHEELBARROW 73 

I say, being said, the High Priest opens the banquet by 
the immemorial ceremony of the island ; that is, dipping 
his consecrated and consecrating fingers into the bowl 
before the blessed - beverage circulates. Seeing himself 
placed next the Priest, and noting the ceremony, and 
thinking himself being captain of a ship as having 
plain precedence over a mere island King, especially in 
the King's own house the captain coolly proceeds to 
wash his hands in the punch-bowl ; taking it, I suppose, 
for a huge finger-glass. ' Now/ said Queequeg, ' what 
you tink now ? Didn't our people laugh ? ' 

At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on 
board the schooner. Hoisting sail, it glided down the 
Acushnet river. On one side, New Bedford rose in 
terraces of streets, their ice -covered trees all glittering 
in the clear, cold air. Huge hills and mountains of casks 
on casks were piled upon her wharves, and side by side 
the world-wandering whale-ships lay silent and safely 
moored at last ; while from others came a sound of 
carpenters and coopers, with blended noises of fires and 
forges to melt the pitch, all betokening that new cruises 
were on the start ; that one most perilous and long 
voyage ended, only begins a second ; and a second ended, 
only begins a third, and so on, forever and for aye. 
Such is the endlessness, yea, the intolerableness of all 
earthly effort. 

Gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze 
waxed fresh ; the little Moss tossed the quick foam from 
her bows, as a young colt his snortings. How I snuffed 
that Tartar air ! how I spurned that turnpike earth ! 
that common highway all over dented with the marks 
of slavish heels and hoofs ; and turned me to admire the 
magnanimity of the sea which will permit no records. 

At the same foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink 
and reel with me. His dusky nostrils swelled apart ; he 



74 MOBY-DICK 

showed his filed and pointed teeth. On, on we flew ; and 
our offing gained, the Moss did homage to the blast ; 
ducked and dived her brows as a slave before the Sultan. 
Sideways leaning, we sideways darted ; every rope-yarn 
tingling like a wire ; the two tall masts buckling like 
Indian canes in land tornadoes. So full of this reeling 
scene were we, as we stood by the plunging bowsprit, 
that for some time we did not notice the jeering glances 
of the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled 
that two fellow-beings should be so companionable ; as 
though a white man were anything more dignified than 
a whitewashed negro. But there were some boobies 
and bumpkins there, who, by their intense greenness, 
must have come from the heart and centre of all verdure. 
Queequeg caught one of these young saplings mimicking 
him behind his back. I thought the bumpkin's hour of 
doom was come. Dropping his harpoon, the brawny 
savage caught him in his arms, and by an almost miracu- 
lous dexterity and strength, sent him high up bodily into 
the air ; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset, 
the fellow landed with bursting lungs upon his feet, while 
Queequeg, turning his back upon him, lighted his toma- 
hawk-pipe and passed it to me for a puff. 

' Capting ! capting ! ' yelled the bumpkin, running 
toward that officer ; ' Capting, capting, here 's the 
devil.' 

' Halloa, you sir/ cried the captain, a gaunt rib of the 
sea, stalking up to Queequeg, ' what in thunder do you 
mean by that ? Don't you know you might have killed 
that chap ? ' 

' What him say ? ' said Queequeg, as he mildly turned 
to me. 

' He say,' said I, ' that you came near kill-e that man 
there,' pointing to the still shivering greenhorn. 

' Kill-e/ cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed face 



WHEELBARROW 75 

into an unearthly expression of disdain, ' ah ! him bevy 
small-e fish-e ; Queequeg no-kill-e so small-e fish-e ; 
Queequeg Idll-e big whale ! ' 

' Look you/ roared the captain, ' I '11 kill-e you, you 
cannibal, if you try any more of your tricks aboard here ; 
so mind your eye.' 

But it so happened just then, that it was high time for 
the captain to mind his own eye. The prodigious strain 
upon the mainsail had parted the weather-sheet, and the 
tremendous boom was now flying from side to side, com- 
pletely sweeping the entire after part of the deck. The 
poor fellow whom Queequeg had handled so roughly, 
was swept overboard ; all hands were in a panic ; and to 
attempt snatching at the boom to stay it, seemed madness. 
It flew from right to left, and back again, almost in one 
ticking of a watch, and every instant seemed on the point 
of snapping into splinters. Nothing was done, and noth- 
ing seemed capable of being done ; those on deck rushed 
toward the bows, and stood eyeing the boom as if it were 
the lower jaw of an exasperated whale. In the midst of 
this consternation, Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, 
and crawling under the path of the boom, whipped hold 
of a rope, secured one end to the bulwarks, and then 
flinging the other like a lasso, caught it round the boom 
as it swept over his head, and at the next jerk, the spar 
was that way trapped, and all was safe. The schooner 
was run into the wind, and while the hands were clearing 
away the stern boat, Queequeg, stripped to the waist, 
darted from the side with a long living arc of a leap. For 
three minutes or more he was seen swimming like a dog, 
throwing his long arms straight out before him, and by 
turns revealing his brawny shoulders through the freezing 
foam. I looked at the grand and glorious fellow, but saw 
no one to be saved. The greenhorn had gone down. 
Shooting himself perpendicularly from the water, Quee- 



76 MOBY-DICK 

queg now took an instant's glance around him, and seem- 
ing to see just how matters were, dived down and dis- 
appeared. A few minutes more, and he rose again, one 
arm still striking out, and with the other dragging a life- 
less form. The boat soon picked them up. The poor 
bumpkin was restored. All hands voted Queequeg a 
noble trump ; the captain begged his pardon. From 
that hour I clove to Queequeg like a barnacle ; yea, till 
poor Queequeg took his last long dive. 

Was there ever such unconsciousness ? He did not 
seem to think that he at all deserved a medal from the 
Humane and Magnanimous Societies. He only asked for 
water fresh water something to wipe the brine off ; 
that done, he put on dry clothes, lighted his pipe, and 
leaning against the bulwarks, and mildly eyeing those 
around him, seemed to be saying to himself ' It 's a 
mutual, joint-stock world, in all meridians. We canni- 
bals must help these Christians. 5 



CHAPTER XIV 



NANTUCKET 

NOTHING more happened on the passage worthy the 
mentioning ; so, after a fine run, we safely arrived in 
Nantucket. 

Nantucket ! Take out your map and look at it. 
See what a real corner of the world it occupies ; how it 
stands there, away off shore, more lonely than the Eddy- 
stone lighthouse. Look at it a mere hillock, and elbow 
of sand ; all beach, without a background. There is 
more sand there than you would use in twenty years as a 
substitute for blotting-paper. Some gamesome wights 
will tell you that they have to plant weeds there, they 
don't grow naturally ; that they import Canada thistles ; 
that they have to send beyond seas for a spile to stop a 
leak in an oil-cask ; that pieces of wood in Nantucket 
are carried about like bits of the true cross in Rome ; 
that people there plant toadstools before their houses, 
to get under the shade in summer time ; that one blade 
of grass makes an oasis, three blades in a day's walk a 
prairie ; that they wear quicksand shoes, something like 
Laplander snow-shoes ; that they are so shut up, belted 
about, every way enclosed, surrounded, and made an 
utter island of by the ocean, that to their very chairs and 
tables small clams will sometimes be found adhering, as 
to the backs of sea-turtles. But these extravaganzas 
only show that Nantucket is no Illinois. 

Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this 
island was settled by the red men. Thus goes the legend. 

77 



78 MOBY-DICK 

In olden times an eagle swooped down upon the New 
England coast, and carried off an infant Indian in his 
talons. With loud lament the parents saw their child 
borne out of sight over the wide waters. They resolved 
to follow in the same direction. Setting out in their 
canoes, after a perilous passage they discovered the 
island, and there they found an empty ivory casket, 
the poor little Indian's skeleton. 

What wonder, then, that these Nantucketers, born on 
a beach, should take to the sea for a livelihood ! They 
first caught crabs and quohogs in the sand ; grown 
bolder, they waded out with nets for mackerel ; more 
experienced, they pushed off in boats and captured cod ; 
and at last, launching a navy of great ships on the sea, 
explored this watery world ; put an incessant belt of cir- 
cumnavigations round it ; peeped in at Behring Straits ; 
and in all seasons and all oceans declared everlasting war 
with the mightiest animated mass that has survived the 
Flood ; most monstrous and most mountainous ! That 
Himalayan, salt-sea mastodon, clothed with such por- 
tentousness of unconscious power, that his very panics 
are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious 
assaults ! 

And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea- 
hermits, issuing from their ant-hill in the sea, overrun 
and conquered the watery world like so many Alexanders ; 
parcelling out among them the Atlantic, Pacific, and 
Indian oceans, as the three pirate powers did Poland. Let 
America add Mexico to Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada ; 
let the English over swarm all India, and hang out their 
blazing banner from the sun; two-thirds of this terr- 
aqueous globe are the Nantucketer's. For the sea is his ; 
he owns it, as Emperors own empires ; other seamen 
having but a right of way through it. Merchant ships 
are but extension bridges ; armed ones but floating forts ; 



NANTUCKET 79 

even pirates and privateers, though following the sea as 
highwaymen the road, they but plunder other ships, other 
fragments of the land like themselves, without seeking to 
draw their living from the bottomless deep itself. The 
Nantucketer, he alone resides and riots on the sea ; he 
alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in ships ; to and 
fro ploughing it as his own special plantation. There is 
his home ; there lies his business, which a Noah's flood 
would not interrupt, though it overwhelmed all the 
millions in China. He lives on the sea, as prairie cocks 
in the prairie ; he hides among the waves, he climbs 
them as chamois hunters climb the Alps. For years he 
knows not the land ; so that when he comes to it at last, 
it smells like another world, more strangely than the 
moon would to an Earthsman. With the landless gull, 
that at sunset folds her wings and is rocked to sleep 
between billows ; so, at nightfall, the Nantucketer, out 
of sight of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest, 
while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses and 
whales. 



CHAPTER XV 

CHOWDER 

IT was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came 
snugly to anchor, and Queequeg and I went ashore ; so 
we could attend to no business that day, at least none 
but a supper and a bed. The landlord of the Spouter- 
Inn had recommended us to his cousin Hosea Hussey 
of the Try Pots, whom he asserted to be the proprietor 
of one of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket, and more- 
over he had assured us that Cousin Hosea, as he called 
him, was famous for his chowders. In short, he plainly 
hinted that we could not possibly do better than try pot- 
luck at the Try Pots. But the directions he had given 
us about keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard 
hand till we opened a white church to the larboard, and 
then keeping that on the larboard hand till we made a 
corner three points to the starboard, and that done, 
then ask the first man we met where the place was : these 
crooked directions of his very much puzzled us at first, 
especially as, at the outset, Queequeg insisted that the 
yellow warehouse our first point of departure must be 
left on the larboard hand, whereas I had understood 
Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard. However, 
by dint of beating about a little in the dark, and now and 
then knocking up a peaceable inhabitant to inquire the 
way, we at last came to something which there was no 
mistaking. 

Two enormous wooden pots painted black, and sus- 
pended by asses' ears, swung from the cross-trees of an 

80 






CHOWDER 81 

old topmast, planted in front of an old doorway. The 
horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the other side, 
so that this old topmast looked not a little like a gallows. 
Perhaps I was over-sensitive to such impressions at the 
time, but I could not help staring at this gallows with a 
vague misgiving. A sort of crick was in my neck as I 
gazed up to the two remaining horns ; yes, two of them, 
one for Queequeg, and one for me. It 's ominous, thinks 
I. A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first 
whaling port ; tombstones staring at me in the whale- 
man's chapel ; and here a gallows ! and a pair of pro- 
digious black pots too ! Are these last throwing out 
oblique hints touching Tophet ? 

I was called from these reflections by the sight of a 
freckled woman with yellow hair and a yellow gown, 
standing in the porch of the inn, under a dull red lamp 
swinging there, that looked much like an injured eye, 
and carrying on a brisk scolding with a man in a purple 
woollen shirt. 

1 Get along with ye, 5 said she to the man, ' or I '11 be 
combing ye ! ' 

4 Come on, Queequeg,' said I, 'all right. There's 
Mrs. Hussey.' 

And so it turned out ; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from 
home, but leaving Mrs. Hussey entirely competent to 
attend to all his affairs. Upon making known our de- 
sires for a supper and a bed, Mrs. Hussey, postponing 
further scolding for the present, ushered us into a little 
room, and seating us at a table spread with the relics 
of a recently concluded repast, turned round to us and 
said, ' Clam or cod ? ' 

' What 's that about cods, ma'am ? ' said I, with much 
politeness. 

4 Clam or cod ? ' she repeated. 

' A clam for supper ? a cold clam ; is that what you 

VOL. I. F 



82 MOBY-DICK 

mean, Mrs. Hussey ? ' says I ; ' but that 's a rather cold 
and clammy reception in the winter time, ain't it, Mrs. 
Hussey ? ' 

But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the 
man in the purple shirt, who was waiting for it in 
the entry, and seeming to hear nothing but the word 
' clam, 5 Mrs. Hussey hurried toward an open door 
leading to the kitchen, and bawling out ' clam for two, ' 
disappeared. 

' Queequeg,' said I, ' do you think that we can make out 
a supper for us both on one clam ? ' 

However, a warm savoury steam from the kitchen 
served to belie the apparently cheerless prospect before 
us. But when that smoking chowder came in, the 
mystery was delightfully explained. Oh, sweet friends ! 
hearken to me. It was made of small juicy clams, 
scarcely bigger than hazel nuts, mixed with pounded ship- 
biscuit, and salted pork cut up into little flakes ; the 
whole enriched with butter, and plentifully seasoned with 
pepper and salt. Our appetites being sharpened by the 
frosty voyage, and in particular, Queequeg seeing his 
favourite fishing food before him, and the chowder being 
surpassingly excellent, we dispatched it with great 
expedition : when leaning back a moment and bethink- 
ing me of Mrs. Hussey's clam and cod announcement, 
I thought I would try a little experiment. Stepping 
to the kitchen door, I uttered the word ' cod ' with great 
emphasis, and resumed my seat. In a few moments the 
savoury steam came forth again, but with a different 
flavour, and in good time a fine cod-chowder was placed 
before us. 

We resumed business ; and while plying our spoons 
in the bowl, thinks I to myself, I wonder now if this here 
has any effect on the head ? What 's that stultifying 
saying about chowder-headed people ? ' But look, 



CHOWDER 83 

Queequeg, ain't that a live eel in your bowl ? Where 's 
your harpoon ? ' 

Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots; which well 
deserved its name ; for the pots there were always boiling 
chowders. Chowder for breakfast, and chowder for 
dinner, and chowder for supper, till you began to look for 
fish-bones coming through your clothes. The area before 
the house was paved with clam-shells. Mrs. Hussey wore 
a polished necklace of codfish vertebra ; and Hosea 
Hussey had his account-books bound in superior old 
shark-skin. There was a fishy flavour to the milk, too, 
which I could not at all account for, till one morning 
happening to take a stroll along the beach among some 
fishermen's boats, I saw Hosea 's brindled cow feeding 
on fish remnants, and marching along the sand with each 
foot in a cod's decapitated head, looking very slipshod, 
I assure ye. 

Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions 
from Mrs. Hussey concerning the nearest way to bed ; 
but, as Queequeg was about to precede me up the stairs, 
the lady reached forth her arm, and demanded his har- 
poon ; she allowed no harpoon in her chambers. ' Why 
not ? J said I ; ' every true whaleman sleeps with his 
harpoon but why not ? ' ' Because it 's dangerous, 5 
says she. ' Ever since young Stiggs coming from that 
unfort'nt v'y'ge of his, when he was gone four years and 
a half, with only three barrels of ile, was found dead in 
my first floor back, with his harpoon in his side ; ever 
since then I allow no boarders to take sich dangerous 
weepons in their rooms at night. So, Mr. Queequeg ' 
(for she had learned his name), ' I will just take this 
here iron, and keep it for you till morning. But the 
chowder ; clam or cod to-morrow for breakfast, men ? ' 

' Both,' says I ; ' and let 's have a couple of smoked 
herring by way of variety.' 



CHAPTER XVI 

THE SHIP 

IN bed we concocted our plans for the morrow. But to 
my surprise and no small concern, Queequeg now gave 
me to understand, that he had been diligently consulting 
Yojo the name of his black little god and Yojo had 
told him two or three times over, and strongly insisted 
upon it everyway, that instead of our going together 
among the whaling-fleet in harbour, and in concert 
selecting our craft ; instead of this, I say, Yojo earnestly 
enjoined that the selection of the ship should rest wholly 
with me, inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us ; and, 
in order to do so, had already pitched upon a vessel, which, 
if left to myself, I, Ishmael, should infallibly light upon, 
for all the world as though it had turned out by chance ; 
and in that vessel I must immediately ship myself, for 
the present irrespective of Queequeg. 

I have forgotten to mention that, in many things, 
Queequeg placed great confidence in the excellence of 
Yojo's judgment and surprising forecast of things ; and 
cherished Yojo with considerable esteem, as a rather 
good sort of god, who perhaps meant well enough upon 
the whole, but in all cases did not succeed in his benevolent 
designs. 

Now, this plan of Queequeg's, or rather Yojo's, touch- 
ing the selection of our craft ; I did not like that plan at 
all. I had not a little relied upon Queequeg's sagacity 
to point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our 
fortunes securely. But as all my remonstrances pro- 

84 






THE SHIP 85 

duced no effect upon Queequeg, I was obliged to acquiesce; 
and accordingly prepared to set about this business with 
a determined rushing sort of energy and vigour, that 
should quickly settle that trifling little affair. Next 
morning early, leaving Queequeg shut up with Yojo in 
our little bedroom for it seemed that it was some sort 
of Lent or Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation, and 
prayer with Queequeg and Yojo that day ; how it was 
I never could find out, for, though I applied myself to 
it several times, I never could master his liturgies and 
XXXIX Articles leaving Queequeg, then, fasting on 
his tomahawk-pipe, and Yojo warming himself at his 
sacrificial fire of shavings, I sallied out among the shipping. 
After much prolonged sauntering and many random 
inquiries, I learnt that there were three ships up for 
three-years' voyages the Devil-Dam, the Tit-bit, and 
the Pequod. Devil-Dam, I do not know the origin of ; 
Tit-bit is obvious ; Pequod, you will no doubt remember, 
was the name of a celebrated tribe of Massachusetts 
Indians, now extinct as the ancient Medes. I peered and 
pryed about the Devil-Dam ; from her, hopped over to 
the Tit-bit ; and, finally, going on board the Pequod, 
looked around her for a moment, and then decided that 
this was the very ship for us. 

You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, 
for aught I know ; square-toed luggers ; mountainous 
Japanese junks ; butter-box galliots, and what not ; but 
take my word for it, you never saw such a rare old craft 
as this same rare old Pequod. She was a ship of the old 
school, rather small if anything ; with an old-fashioned 
claw-footed look about her. Long seasoned and weather- 
stained in the typhoons and calms of all four oceans, her 
old hull's complexion was darkened like a French grena- 
dier's, who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia. Her 
venerable bows looked bearded. Her masts cut some- 



86 MOBY-DICK 

where on the coast of Japan, where her original ones were 
lost overboard in a gale her masts stood stiffly up like 
the spines of the three old kings of Cologne. Her ancient 
decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped 
flag-stone in Canterbury Cathedral where Becket bled. 
But to all these her old antiquities were added new and 
marvellous features, pertaining to the wild business that 
for more than half a century she had followed. Old 
Captain Peleg, many years her chief mate, before he com- 
manded another vessel of his own, and now a retired 
seaman, and one of the principal owners of the Pequod, 
this old Peleg, during the term of his chief mateship, had 
built upon her original grotesqueness, and inlaid it, all 
over, with a quaintness both of material and device, un- 
matched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake's carved 
buckler or bedstead. She was apparelled like any bar- 
baric Ethiopian emperor, his neck heavy with pendants 
of polished ivory. She was a thing of trophies. A canni- 
bal of a craft, tricking herself forth in the chased bones 
of her enemies. All round, her unpanelled, open bul- 
warks were garnished like one continuous jaw, with the 
long sharp teeth of the sperm whale, inserted there for 
pins, to fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to. 
Those thews ran not through base blocks of land-wood, 
but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea -ivory. Scorning 
a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm, she sported there 
a tiller ; and that tiller was in one mass, curiously carved 
from the long narrow lower jaw of her hereditary foe. 
The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest, 
felt like the Tartar, when he holds back his fiery steed 
by clutching its jaw. A noble craft, but somehow a most 
melancholy ! All noble things are touched with that. 

Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some 
one having authority, in order to propose myself as a 
candidate for the voyage, at first I saw nobody ; but I 



THE SHIP 87 

could not well overlook a strange sort of tent, or rather 
wigwam, pitched a little behind the mainmast. It 
seemed only a temporary erection used in port. It was 
of a conical shape, some ten feet high ; consisting of the 
long, huge slabs of limber black bone taken from the 
middle and highest part of the jaws of the right whale. 
Planted with their broad ends on the deck, a circle of these 
slabs laced together, mutually sloped toward each other, 
and at the apex united in a tufted point, where the loose 
hairy fibres waved to and fro like the top-knot on some 
old Pottowottamie sachem's head. A triangular opening 
faced toward the bows of the ship, so that the insider 
commanded a complete view forward. 

And half concealed in this queer tenement, I at length 
found one who by his aspect seemed to have authority ; 
and who, it being noon, and the ship's work suspended, 
was now enjoying respite from the burden of command. 
He was seated on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling 
all over with curious carving ; and the bottom of which 
was formed of a stout interlacing of the same elastic stuff 
of which the wigwam was constructed. 

There was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about 
the appearance of the elderly man I saw ; he was brown 
and brawny, like most old seamen, and heavily rolled up 
in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quaker style ; only there 
was a fine and almost microscopic network of the minutest 
wrinkles interlacing round his eyes, which must have 
arisen from his continual sailings in many hard gales, and 
always looking to windward ; for this causes the muscles 
about the eyes to become pursed together. Such eye- 
wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl. 

' Is this the captain of the Pequod ? ' said I, advancing 
to the door of the tent. 

' Supposing it be the captain of the Pequod, what 
dost thou want of him ? ' he demanded. 



88 MOBY-DICK 

' I was thinking of shipping.' 

' Thou wast, wast thou ? I see thou art no Nan- 
tucketer ever been in a stove boat ? ' 

' No, sir, I never have.' 

' Dost know nothing at all about whaling, I dare say 
eh? ' 

' Nothing, sir ; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn. 
I 've been several voyages in the merchant service, and 
I think that 

' Marchant service be damned. Talk not that lingo 
to me. Dost see that leg ? I '11 take that leg away from 
thy stern, if ever thou talkest of the marchant service to 
me again. Marchant service indeed ! I suppose now 
ye feel considerable proud of having served in those 
marchant ships. But flukes ! man, what makes thee 
want to go a-whaling, eh ? it looks a little suspicious, 
don't it, eh ? Hast not been a pirate, hast thou ? 
Didst not rob thy last captain, didst thou ? Dost not 
think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to sea ? ' 

I protested my innocence of these things. I saw that 
under the mask of these half-humorous innuendoes, this 
old seaman, as an insulated Quakerish Nantucketer, was 
full of his insular prejudices, and rather distrustful of all 
aliens, unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the Vineyard. 

' But what takes thee a-whaling ? I want to know that 
before I think of shipping ye.' 

4 Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is. I want to 
see the world/ 

' Want to see what whaling is, eh ? Have ye clapped 
eye on Captain Ahab ? ' 

' Who is Captain Ahab, sir ? ' 

4 Ay, ay, I thought so. Captain Ahab is the captain 
of this ship.' 

' I am mistaken then. I thought I was speaking to 
the captain himself.' 



THE SHIP 89 

' Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg that 's who ye 
are speaking to, young man. It belongs to me and 
Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted out for the voyage, 
and supplied with all her needs, including crew. We are 
part owners and agents. But as I was going to say, if 
thou wantest to know what whaling is, as thou tellest ye 
do, I can put ye in a way of finding it out before ye bind 
yourself to it, past backing out. Clap eye on Captain 
Ahab, young man, and thou wilt finxl that he has only 
one leg.' 

' What do you mean, sir ? Was the other one lost by 
a whale ? ' 

' Lost by a whale ! Young man, come nearer to me : 
it was devoured, chewed up, crunched by the mon- 
strousest parmacetty that ever chipped a boat ! ah, ah ! ' 

I was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little 
touched at the hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, 
but said as calmly as I could, ' What you say is no doubt 
true enough, sir ; but how could I know there was any 
peculiar ferocity in that particular whale, though indeed 
I might have inferred as much from the simple fact of 
the accident.' 

' Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, 
d' ye see ; thou dost not talk shark a bit. Sure, ye 've 
been to sea before now ; sure of that ? ' 

' Sir,' said I, ' I thought I told you that I had been four 
voyages in the merchant ' 

' Hard down out of that ! Mind what I said about the 
marchant service don't aggravate me I won't have it. 
But let us understand each other. I have given thee a 
hint about what whaling is ; do ye yet feel inclined for it ? ' 

4 1 do, sir.' 

' Very good. Now, art thou the man to pitch a 
harpoon down a live whale's throat, and then jump 
after it ? Answer, quick ! ' 



90 MOBY-DICK 

' I am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to 
do so ; not to be got rid of, that is ; which I don't take 
to be the fact.' 

6 Good again. Now then, thou not only wantest to go 
a -whaling, to find out by experience what whaling is, 
but ye also want to go in order to see the world ? Was 
not that what ye said ? I thought so. Well then, just 
step forward there, and take a peep over the weather-bow, 
and then back to me and tell me what ye see there.' 

For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious 
request, not knowing exactly how to take it, whether 
humorously or in earnest. But concentrating all his 
crow's feet into one scowl, Captain Peleg started me on 
the errand. 

Going forward and glancing over the weather -bow, I 
perceived that the ship, swinging to her anchor with the 
flood-tide, was now obliquely pointing toward the open 
ocean. The prospect was unlimited, but exceedingly 
monotonous and forbidding ; not the slightest variety 
that I could see. 

' Well, what 's the report ? ' said Peleg when I came 
back ; ' what did ye see ? ' 

1 Not much,' I replied 'nothing but water ; considerable 
horizon though, and there 's a squall coming up, I think.' 

' Well, what dost thou think then of seeing the world ? 
Do ye wish to go round Cape Horn to see any more of it, 
I eh ? Can't ye see the world where you stand ? ' 

I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and 
I would ; and the Pequod was as good a ship as any I 

(thought the best and all this I now repeated to Peleg. 
Seeing me so determined, he expressed his willingness to 
ship me. 

' And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off, ' he 
added ' come along with ye.' And so saying, he led 
the way below deck into the cabin. 



THE SHIP 91 

Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most 
uncommon and surprising figure. It turned out to be 
Captain Bildad, who along with Captain Peleg was one 
of the largest owners of the vessel ; the other shares, as 
is sometimes the case in these ports, being held by a 
crowd of old annuitants ; widows, fatherless children, 
and chancery wards ; each owning about the value of a 
timber head, or a foot of plank, or a nail or two in the ship. 
People in Nantucket invest their money in whaling- 
vessels, the same way that you do yours in approved 
state stocks bringing in good interest. 

Now Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nan- 
tucketers, was a Quaker, the island having been originally 
settled by that sect ; and to this day its inhabitants in 
general retain in an uncommon measure the peculiarities 
of the Quaker, only variously and anomalously modified 
by things altogether alien and heterogeneous. For some 
of these same Quakers are the most sanguinary of all 
sailors and whale -hunters. They are fighting Quakers ; 
they are Quakers with a vengeance. 

So that there are instances among them of men, who, 
named with Scripture names a singularly common 
fashion on the island and in childhood naturally imbib- 
ing the stately dramatic thee and thou of the Quaker 
idiom ; still, from the audacious, daring, and boundless 
adventure of their subsequent lives, strangely blend with 
these unoutgrown peculiarities a thousand bold dashes 
of character, not unworthy a Scandinavian sea-king, or a 
poetical pagan Roman. And when these things unite 
in a man of greatly superior natural force, with a globular 
brain and a ponderous heart ; who has also by the still- 
ness and seclusion of many long night-watches in the 
remotest waters, and beneath constellations never seen 
here at the north, been led to think untraditionally and 
independently ; receiving all nature's sweet or savage 



92 MOBY-DICK 

impressions fresh from her own virgin voluntary and 
confiding breast, and thereby chiefly, but with some help 
from accidental advantages, to learn a bold and nervous 
lofty language that man makes one in a whole nation's 
census a mighty pageant creature, formed for noble 
tragedies. Nor will it at all detract from him, dramatic- 
ally regarded, if either by birth or other circumstances, he 
have what seems a half- wilful over-ruling morbidness at 
the bottom of his nature. For all men tragically great 
are made so through a certain morbidness. Be sure of 
this, young ambition, all mortal greatness is but disease. 
But, as yet we have not to do with such an one, but with 
quite another ; and still a man, who, if indeed peculiar, 
it only results again from another phase of the Quaker, 
modified by individual circumstances. 

Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do, 
retired whaleman. But unlike Captain Peleg who 
cared not a rush for what are called serious things, and 
indeed deemed those self-same serious things the veriest 
of all trifles Captain Bildad had not only been originally 
educated according to the strictest sect of Nantucket 
Quakerism, but all his subsequent ocean life ; and the sight 
of many unclad, lovely island creatures, round the Horn 
all that had not moved this native-born Quaker one 
single jot, had not so much as altered one angle of his vest. 
Still, for all this immutableness, was there some lack of 
common consistency about worthy Captain Bildad. 
Though refusing, from conscientious scruples, to bear 
arms against land invaders, yet himself had illimitably 
invaded the Atlantic and Pacific ; and though a sworn 
foe to human bloodshed, yet had he in his straight -bodied 
coat, spilled tuns upon tuns of leviathan gore. How 
now in the contemplative evening of his days, the pious 
Bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence, I do 
not know ; but it did not seem to concern him much, 






THE SHIP 93 

and very probably he had long since come to the sage and 
sensible conclusion that a Oman's religion is one thing, 
and this practical world quite another. This world pays 
dividends. Rising from a little cabin-boy in short clothes 
of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a broad shad- 
bellied waistcoat ; from that becoming boat-header, 
chief mate, and captain, and finally a shipowner ; Bildad, 
as I hinted before, had concluded his adventurous career 
by wholly retiring from active life at the goodly age of 
sixty, and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet 
receiving of his well-earned income. 

Now Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of 
being an incorrigible old hunks, and in his sea -going days, 
a bitter, hard taskmaster. They told me in Nantucket, 
though it certainly seems a curious story, that when he 
sailed the old Categut whaleman, his crew, upon arriving 
home, were mostly all carried ashore to the hospital, 
sore exhausted and worn out. For a pious man, especi- v 
ally for a Quaker, he was certainly rather hard-hearted, to \ 
say the least. He never used to swear, though, at his 
men, they said ; but somehow he got an inordinate 
quantity of cruel, unmitigated hard work out of them. 
When Bildad was a chief mate, to have his drab-coloured 
eye intently looking at you, made you feel completely 
nervous, till you could clutch something a hammer or a 
marling-spike and go to work like mad, at something or 
other, never mind what. Indolence and idleness perished 
from before him. His own person was the exact embodi- 
ment of his utilitarian character. On his long, gaunt 
body he carried no spare flesh, no superfluous beard, 
his chin having a soft, economical nap to it, like the worn 
nap of his broad-brimmed hat. 

Such, then, was the person that I saw seated on the 
transom when I followed Captain Peleg down into the 
cabin. The space between the decks was small ; and 



94 MOBY-DICK 

there, bolt-upright, sat old Bildad, who always sat so, 
and never leaned, and this to save his coat-tails. His 
broad-brim was placed beside him ; his legs were stiffly 
crossed ; his drab vesture was buttoned up to his chin ; 
and spectacles on nose, he seemed absorbed in reading 
from a ponderous volume. 

' Bildad,' cried Captain Peleg, ' at it again, Bildad, eh ? 
Ye have been studying those Scriptures, now, for the last 
thirty years, to my certain knowledge. How far ye got, 
Bildad ? ' 

As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old 
shipmate, Bildad, without noticing his present irreverence, 
quietly looked up, and seeing me, glanced again inquiringly 
toward Peleg. 

4 He says he 's our man, Bildad/ said Peleg, ' he wants 
to ship. 5 

' Dost thee ? ' said Bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning 
round to me. 

' I dost/ said I unconsciously, he was so intense a 
Quaker. 

' What do ye think of him, Bildad ? ' said Peleg. 

' He '11 do,' said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on 
spelling away at his book in a mumbling tone quite 
audible. 

I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, 
especially as Peleg, his friend and old shipmate, seemed 
such a blusterer. But I said nothing, only looking round 
me sharply. Peleg now threw open a chest, and drawing 
forth the ship's articles, placed pen and ink before him, 
and seated himself at a little table. I began to think 
it was high time to settle with myself at what terms I 
would be willing to engage for the voyage. I was already 
aware that in the whaling business they paid no wages ; 
but all hands, including the captain, received certain 
shares of the profits called lays, and that these lays were 



THE SHIP 95 

proportioned to the degree of importance pertaining to 
the respective duties of the ship's company. I was also 
aware that being a green-hand at whaling, my own lay 
would not be very large ; but considering that I was used 
to the sea, could steer a ship, splice a rope, and all that, 
I made no doubt that from all I had heard I should be 
offered at least the 275th lay that is, the 275th part of 
the clear nett proceeds of the voyage, whatever that 
might eventually amount to. And though the 275th 
lay was what they call a rather long lay, yet it was better 
than nothing ; and if we had a lucky voyage, might 
pretty nearly pay for the clothing I would wear out on it, 
not to speak of my three years' beef and board, for which 
I would not have to pay one stiver. 

It might be thought that this was a poor way to 
accumulate a princely fortune and so it was, a very poor 
way indeed. But I am one of those that never take on 
about princely fortunes, and am quite content if the world 
is ready to board and lodge me, while I am putting up at 
this grim sign of the Thunder Cloud. Upon the whole, I 
thought that the 275th lay would be about the fair thing, 
but would not have been surprised had I been offered 
the 200th, considering I was of a broad-shouldered make. 

But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little 
distrustful about receiving a generous share of the profits 
was this : Ashore, I had heard something of both Captain 
Peleg and his unaccountable old crony Bildad ; how that 
they being the principal proprietors of the Pequod, there- 
fore the other and more inconsiderable and scattered 
owners, left nearly the whole management of the ship's 
affairs to these two. And I did not know but what the 
stingy old Bildad might have a mighty deal to say about 
shipping hands, especially as I now found him on board 
the Pequod, quite at home there in the cabin, and reading 
his Bible as if at his own fireside. Now while Peleg was 



96 MOBY-DICK 

vainly trying to mend a pen with his jack-knife, old Bildad, 
to my no small surprise, considering that he was such an 
interested party in these proceedings ; Bildad never 
heeded us, but went on mumbling to himself out of his 
book, ' Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, 
where moth ' 

' Well, Captain Bildad,' interrupted Peleg, ' what d' ye 
say, what lay shall we give this young man ? ' 

' Thou knowest best,' was the sepulchral reply, ' the 
seven hundred and seventy-seventh wouldn't be too 
much, would it ? " where moth and rust do corrupt, 
but lay " ' 

Lay, indeed, thought I, and such a lay ! the seven 
hundred and seventy-seventh ! Well, old Bildad, you 
are determined that I, for one, shall not lay up many lays 
here below, where moth and rust do corrupt. It was an 
exceedingly long lay that, indeed ; and though from the 
magnitude of the figure it might at first deceive a lands- 
man, yet the slightest consideration will show that though 
seven hundred and seventy -seven is a pretty large num- 
ber, yet, when you come to make a teenth of it, you will 
then see, I say, that the seven hundred and seventy- 
seventh part of a farthing is a good deal less than seven 
hundred and seventy -seven gold doubloons ; and so I 
thought at the time. 

4 Why, blast your eyes, Bildad,' cried Peleg, ' thou dost 
not want to swindle this young man ! he must have more 
than that.' 

' Seven hundred and seventy -seventh,' again said 
Bildad, without lifting his eyes ; and then went on 
mumbling ' for where your treasure is, there will your 
heart be also.' 

' I am going to put him down for the three hundredth,' 
said Peleg, ' do ye hear that, Bildad ? The three hundredth 
lay, I say.' 






THE SHIP 97 

Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly to- 
ward him said, ' Captain Peleg, thou hast a generous 
heart ; but thou must consider the duty thou owest to 
the other owners of this ship widows and orphans; many 
of them and that if we too abundantly reward the 
labours of this young man, we may be taking the bread 
from those widows and those orphans. The seven 
hundred and seventy -seventh lay, Captain Peleg.' 

' Thou Bildad ! ' roared Peleg, starting up and clattering 
about the cabin. ' Blast ye, Captain Bildad, if I had 
followed thy advice in these matters, I would afore now 
had a conscience to lug about that would be heavy 
enough to founder the largest ship that ever sailed round 
Cape Horn.' 

4 Captain Peleg,' said Bildad steadily, ' thy conscience 
may be drawing ten inches of water, or ten fathoms, I 
can't tell ; but as thou art still an impenitent man, 
Captain Peleg, I greatly fear lest thy conscience be but 
a leaky one ; and will in the end sink thee foundering 
down to the fiery pit, Captain Peleg.' 

' Fiery pit ! fiery pit ! ye insult me, man ; past all 
natural bearing, ye insult me. It 's an all-fired outrage 
to tell any human creature that he 's bound to hell. 
Flukes and flames ! Bildad, say that again to me, and 
start my soul-bolts, but I '11 I '11 yes, I '11 swallow a 
live goat with all his hair and horns on. Out of the cabin, 
ye canting, drab-coloured son of a wooden gun & straight 
wake with ye ! ' 

As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but 
with a marvellous oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for 
that time eluded him. 

Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two 
principal and responsible owners of the ship, and feeling 
half a mind to give up all idea of sailing in a vessel so 
questionably owned and temporarily commanded, I 

VOL. i. G 



98 MOBY-DICK 

stepped aside from the door to give egress to Bildad, who, 
I made no doubt, was all eagerness to vanish from before 
the awakened wrath of Peleg. But to my astonishment, 
he sat down again on the transom very quietly, and seemed 
to have not the slightest intention of withdrawing. He 
seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg and his ways. As 
for Peleg, after letting off his rage as he had, there seemed 
no more left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb, 
though he twitched a little as if still nervously agitated. 
' Whew ! ' he whistled at last ' the squall 's gone off to 
leeward, I think. Bildad, thou used to be good at 
sharpening a lance, mend that pen, will ye. My jack- 
knife here needs the grindstone. That 's he ; thank ye, 
Bildad. Now then, my young man, Ishmael 's thy name, 
didn't ye say ? Well then, down ye go here, Ishmael, 
for the three hundredth lay.' 

' Captain Peleg,' said I, ' I have a friend with me who 
wants to ship too shall I bring him down to-morrow ? ' 

' To be sure,' said Peleg. ' Fetch him along, and we '11 
look at him.' 

' What lay does he want ? ' groaned Bildad, glancing 
up from the book in which he had again been burying 
himself. 

* Oh ! never thee mind about that, Bildad,' said Peleg. 
' Has he ever whaled it any ? ' turning to me. 

' Killed more whales than I can count, Captain Peleg.' 

' Well, bring him along then.' 

And, after signing the papers, off I went ; nothing 
doubting but that I had done a good morning's work, 
and that the Pequod was the identical ship that Yojo 
had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape. 

But I had not proceeded far, when I began to bethink 
me that the captain with whom I was to sail yet remained 
unseen by me ; though, indeed, in many cases, a whale- 
ship will be completely fitted out, and receive all her crew 






THE SHIP 99 

on board, ere the captain makes himself visible by arriv- 
ing to take command ; for sometimes these voyages are 
so prolonged, and the shore intervals at home so exceed- 
ingly brief, that if the captain have a family, or any 
absorbing concernment of that sort, he does not trouble 
himself much about his ship in port, but leaves her to 
the owners till all is ready for sea. However, it is always 
as well to have a look at him before irrevocably commit- 
ting yourself into his hands. Turning back I accosted 
Captain Peleg, inquiring where Captain Ahab was to be 
found. 

* And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab ? It 's 
all right enough ; thou art shipped.' 

' Yes, but I should like to see him. 3 

' But I don't think thou wilt be able to at present. I 
don't know exactly what 's the matter with him ; but 
he keeps close inside the house ; a sort of sick, and yet he 
don't look so. In fact, he ain't sick ; but no, he isn't well 
either. Anyhow, young man, he won't always see me, 
so I don't suppose he will thee. He 's a queer man, 
Captain Ahab so some think but a good one. Oh, 
thou 'It like him well enough ; no fear, no fear. He 's a 
grand, ungodly, god-like man, Captain Ahab ; doesn't 
speak much ; but, when he does speak, then you may well 
listen. Mark ye, be forewarned ; Ahab 's above the 
common ; Ahab 's been in colleges, as well as 'mong the 
cannibals ; been used to deeper wonders than the waves ; 
fixed his fiery lance hi mightier, stranger foes than whales. 
His lance ! ay, the keenest and the surest that out of 
all our isle ! Oh ! he ain't Captain Bildad ; no, and he 
ain't Captain Peleg ; he 's Ahab, boy ; and Ahab of old, 
thou knowest, was a crowned king ! ' 

' And a very vile one. When that wicked king was 
slain, the dogs, did they not lick his blood ? ' 

1 Come hither to me hither, hither,' said Peleg, with 



100 MOBY-DICK 

a significance in his eye that almost startled me. ' Look 
ye, lad ; never say that on board the Pequod. Never say 
it anywhere. Captain Ahab did not name himself. 
'Twas a foolish, ignorant whim of his crazy, widowed 
mother, who died when he was only a twelvemonth old. 
And yet the old squaw Tistig, at Gay Head, said that the 
name would somehow prove prophetic. And, perhaps, 
other fools like her may tell thee the same. I wish to 
warn thee. It 's a lie. I know Captain Ahab well ; I 've 
sailed with him as mate years ago ; I know what he is a 
good man not a pious, good man, like Bildad, but a 
swearing good man something like me only there 's a 
good deal more of him. Ay, ay, I know that he was 
never very jolly ; and I know that on the passage home, 
he was a little out of his mind for a spell ; but it was the 
sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump that brought 
that about, as anyone might see. I know, too, that ever 
since he lost his leg last voyage by that accursed whale, 
he ? s been a kind of moody desperate moody, and savage 
sometimes ; but that will all pass off. And once for all, 
let me tell thee and assure thee, young man, it 's better 
to sail with a moody good captain than a laughing bad 
one. So good-bye to thee and wrong not Captain 
Ahab, because he happens to have a wicked name. Be- 
sides, my boy, he has a wife not three voyages wedded 
a_ sweet, resigned girl. Think of that ; by that sweet 
girl that old man has a child : hold ye then there can be 
any utter, hopeless harm in Ahab ? No, no, my lad ; 
stricken, blasted, if he be, Ahab has his humanities ! ' 

As I walked away, I was full of thoughtfuhiess ; what 
had been incidentally revealed to me of Captain Ahab, 
filled me with a certain wild vagueness of painfulness 
concerning him. And somehow, at the time, I felt a 
sympathy and a sorrow for him, but for I don't know 
what, ^unless it was the cruel loss of his leg. And yet I 






THE SHIP 101 

also felt a strange awe of him ; but that sort of awe, 
which I cannot at all describe, was not exactly awe ; I 
do not know what it was. But I felt it ; and it did not 
disincline me toward him ; though I felt impatience 
at what seemed like mystery in him, so imperfectly as 
he was known to me then. However, my thoughts were 
at length carried in other directions, so that for the present 
dark Ahab slipped my mind. 



CHAPTER XVII 

THE RAMADAN 

As Queequeg 's Ramadan, or Fasting and Humiliation, 
was to continue all day, I did not choose to disturb him 
till toward night -fall ; for I cherish the greatest respect 
toward everybody's religious obligations, never mind 
how comical, and could not find it in my heart to under- 
value even a congregation of ants worshipping a toad- 
stool ; or those other creatures in certain parts of our 
earth, who with a degree of footmanism quite unpre- 
cedented in other planets, bow down before the torso 
of a deceased landed proprietor merely on account of 
the inordinate possessions yet owned and rented in his 
name. 

I say, we good Presbyterian Christians should be 
charitable in these things, and not fancy ourselves so 
vastly superior to other mortals, pagans and what not, 
because of their half -crazy conceits on these subjects. 
There was Queequeg, now, certainly entertaining the most 
absurd notions about Yojo and his Ramadan ; but what 
of that ? Queequeg thought he knew what he was about, 
I suppose ; he seemed to be content ; and there let him 
rest. All our arguing with him would not avail ; let him 
be, I say : and Heaven have mercy on us all Presby- 
terians and pagans alike for we are all somehow dread- 
fully cracked about the head, and sadly need mending. 

Toward evening, when I felt assured that all his 
performances and rituals must be over, I went up to his 
room and knocked at the door ; but no answer. I tried 
102 



i 



THE RAMADAN 103 

to open it, but it was fastened inside. ' Queequeg,' said I 
softly through the keyhole : all silent. ' I say, Quee- 
queg ! why don't you speak ? It 's I Ishmael.' But 
all remained still as before. I began to grow alarmed. I 
had allowed him such abundant time ; I thought he might 
have had an apoplectic fit. I looked through the key- 
hole ; but the door opening into an odd corner of the 
room, the keyhole prospect was but a crooked and sinister 
one. I could only see part of the foot-board of the bed 
and a line of the wall, but nothing more. I was surprised 
to behold resting against the wall the wooden shaft of Quee- 
queg 's harpoon, which the landlady the evening previous 
had taken from him, before our mounting to the chamber. 
That 's strange, thought I ; but at any rate, since the 
harpoon stands yonder, and he seldom or never goes 
abroad without it, therefore he must be inside here, and 
no possible mistake. 

' Queequeg ! Queequeg ! ' all still. Something must 
have happened. Apoplexy ! I tried to burst open the 
door ; but it stubbornly resisted. Running downstairs, 
I quickly stated my suspicions to the first person I met 
the chambermaid. ' La ! la ! ' she cried, ' I thought 
something must be the matter. I went to make the bed 
after breakfast, and the door was locked ; and not a 
mouse to be heard ; and it 's been just so silent ever since. 
But I thought, maybe, you had both gone off and locked 
your baggage in for safe keeping. La ! la, ma'am ! 
Mistress ! murder ! Mrs. Hussey ! apoplexy ! ' and 
with these cries, she ran toward the kitchen, I following. 

Mrs. Hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one 
hand and a vinegar-cruet in the other, having just broken 
away from the occupation of attending to the castors, 
and scolding her little black boy meantime. 

' Wood-house ! ' cried I, ' which way to it ? Run, for 
God's sake, and fetch something to pry open the door 



104 MOBY-DICK 

the axe ! the axe ! he 's had a stroke ; depend upon 
it ! ' and so saying I was unmethodically rushing up- 
stairs again empty-handed, when Mrs. Hussey interposed 
the mustard-pot and vinegar-cruet, and the entire castor 
of her countenance. 

' What J s the matter with you, young man ? ' 

' Get the axe ! For God's sake, run for the doctor, 
someone, while I pry it open ! ' 

' Look here/ said the landlady, quickly putting down 
the vinegar-cruet, so as to have one hand free ; ' look 
here ; are you talking about prying open any of my 
doors ? ' and with that she seized my arm. ' What 's 
the matter with you ? What 's the matter with you, 
shipmate ? ' 

In as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, I gave her 
to understand the whole case. Unconsciously clapping 
the vinegar-cruet to one side of her nose, she ruminated 
for an instant ; then exclaimed 4 No ! I haven't seen it 
since I put it there.' Running to a little closet under the 
landing of the stairs, she glanced in, and returning, told 
me that Queequeg's harpoon was missing. ' He 's killed 
himself,' she cried. ' It 's unfort'nate Stiggs done over 
again there goes another counterpane God pity his 
poor mother ! it will be the ruin of my house. Has 
the poor lad a sister ? Where 's that girl ? there, Betty, 
go to Snarles the Painter, and tell him to paint me a sign, 
with " no suicides permitted here, and no smoking in 
the parlour " ; might as well kill both birds at once. 
Kill ? The Lord be merciful to his ghost ! What 's 
that noise there ? You, young man, avast there ! ' 

And running after me, she caught me as I was again 
trying to force open the door. 

' I won't allow it ; I won't have my premises spoiled. 
Go for the locksmith, there 's one about a mile from here. 
But avast ! ' putting her hand in her side-pocket, ' here 's 



THE RAMADAN 105 

a key that '11 fit, I guess ; let 's see.' And with that, she 
turned it in the lock ; but, alas ! Queequeg 's supple- 
mental bolt remained unwithdrawn within. 

6 Have to burst it open,' said I, and was running down 
the entry a little, for a good start, when the landlady 
caught at me, again vowing I should not break down her 
premises ; but I tore from her, and with a sudden bodily 
rush dashed myself full against the mark. 

With a prodigious noise the door flew open, and the 
knob slamming against the wall, sent the plaster to the 
ceiling ; and there, good heavens ! there sat Queequeg, 
altogether cool and self-collected ; right in the middle 
of the room ; squatting on his hams, and holding Yojo 
on top of his head. He looked neither one way nor the 
other way, but sat like a carved image with scarce a sign 
of active life. 

' Queequeg/ said I, going up to him, ' Queequeg, what 's 
the matter with you ? ' 

' He hain't been a-sittin* so all day, has he ? ' said the 
landlady. 

But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him ; 
I almost felt like pushing him over, so as to change his 
position, for it was almost intolerable, it seemed so pain- 
fully and unnaturally constrained ; especially, as in all 
probability he had been sitting so for upward of eight or 
ten hours, going too without his regular meals. 

'Mrs. Hussey,' said I, 'he's alive, at all events; so 
leave us, if you please, and I will see to this strange affair 
myself.' 

Closing the door upon the landlady, I endeavoured to 
>revail upon Queequeg to take a chair ; but in vain. 
There he sat ; and all he could do for all my polite 
arts and blandishments he would not move a peg, nor 
say a single word, nor even look at me, nor notice my 
presence in any the slightest way. 



106 MOBY-DICK 

I wonder, thought I, if this can possibly be a part of his 
Ramadan ; do they fast on their hams that way in his 
native island ? It must be so ; yes, it 's part of his 
creed, I suppose ; well, then, let him rest ; he '11 get up 
sooner or later, no doubt. It can't last for ever, thank 
God, and his Ramadan only comes once a year ; and I 
don't believe it 's very punctual then. 

I went down to supper. After sitting a long time 
listening to the long stories of some sailors who had just 
come from a plum-pudding voyage, as they called it (that 
is, a short whaling voyage in a schooner or brig, confined 
to the north of the Line, in the Atlantic Ocean only) ; after 
listening to these plum-puddingers till nearly eleven 
o'clock, I went upstairs to go to bed, feeling quite sure 
by this time Queequeg must certainly have brought his 
Ramadan to a termination. But no ; there he was just 
where I had left him ; he had not stirred an inch. I began 
to grow vexed with him ; it seemed so downright sense- 
less and insane to be sitting there all day and half the 
night on his hams in a cold room, holding a piece of wood 
on his head. 

' For heaven's sake, Queequeg, get up and shake your- 
self ; get up and have some supper. You 11 starve ; 
you '11 kill yourself, Queequeg.' But not a word did he 
reply. 

Despairing of him, therefore, I deter mined to go to bed 
and to sleep ; and no doubt, before a great while, he 
would follow me. But previous to turning in, I took my 
heavy bearskin jacket, and threw it over him, as it 
promised to be a very cold night ; and he had nothing 
but his ordinary round jacket on. For some time, do 
all I would, I could not get into the faintest doze. I had 
blown out the candle ; and the mere thought of Queequeg 
not four feet off sitting there in that uneasy position, 
stark alone in the cold and dark ; this made me really 



THE RAMADAN 107 

wretched. Think of it ; sleeping all night in the same 
room with a wide-awake pagan on his hams in this dreary, 
unaccountable Ramadan ! 

But somehow I dropped off at last, and knew nothing 
more till break of day ; when, looking over the bedside, 
there squatted Queequeg, as if he had been screwed down 
to the floor. But as soon as the first glimpse of sun 
entered the window, up he got, with stiff and grating 
joints, but with a cheerful look ; limped toward me where 
I lay ; pressed his forehead again against mine ; and said 
his Ramadan was over. 

Now, as I before hinted, I have no objection to any 
person's religion, be it what it may, so long as that person 
does not kill or insult any other person, because that other 
person don't believe it also. But when a man's religion 
becomes really frantic ; when it is a positive torment to 
him ; and, in fine, makes this earth of ours an uncom- 
fortable inn to lodge in ; then I think it high time to take 
that individual aside and argue the point with him. 

And just so I now did with Queequeg. ' Queequeg,' 
said I, ' get into bed now, and lie and listen to me.' I 
then went on, beginning with the rise and progress of 
the primitive religions, and coming down to the various 
religions of the present time, during which time I laboured 
to show Queequeg that all these Lents, Ramadans, and 
prolonged ham-squattings in cold, cheerless rooms were 
stark nonsense ; bad for the health ; useless for the soul ; 
opposed, in short, to the obvious laws of hygiene and 
common-sense. I told him, too, that he being in other 
things such an extremely sensible and sagacious savage, 
it pained me, very badly pained me, to see him now so 
deplorably foolish about this ridiculous Ramadan of his. 
Besides, argued I, fasting makes the body cave in ; hence 
the spirit caves in ; and all thoughts born of a fast must 
necessarily be half -starved. This is the reason why most 






108 MOBY-DICK 

dyspeptic religionists cherish such melancholy notions 
about their hereafters. In one word, Queequeg, said I, 
rather digressively ; hell is an idea first born on an un- 
digested apple-dumpling ; and since then perpetuated 
through the hereditary dyspepsias nurtured by Bamadans. 

I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever 
troubled with dyspepsia ; expressing the idea very plainly, 
so that he could take it in. He said no ; only upon one 
memorable occasion. It was after a great feast given 
by his father the King, on the gaming of a great battle 
wherein fifty of the enemy had been killed by about two 
o'clock in the afternoon, and all cooked and eaten that 
very evening. 

4 No more, Queequeg,' said I, shuddering ; 'that will 
do ' ; for I knew the inferences without his further hint- 
ing them. I had seen a sailor who had visited that very 
island, and he told me that it was the custom, when a 
great battle had been gained there, to barbecue all the 
slain in the yard or garden of the victor ; and then, one 
by one, they were placed in great wooden trenchers, and 
garnished round like a pilau, with breadfruit and cocoa- 
nuts ; and with some parsley in their mouths, were sent 
round with the victor's compliments to all his friends, 
just as though these presents were so many Christmas 
turkeys. 

After all, I do not think that my remarks about religion 
made much impression upon Queequeg. Because, in 
the first place, he somehow seemed dull of hearing on 
that important subject, unless considered from his own 
point of view ; and, in the second place, he did not more 
than one-third understand me, couch my ideas simply as 
I would ; and, finally, he no doubt thought he knew a 
good deal more about the true religion than I did. He 
looked at me with a sort of condescending concern and 
compassion, as though he thought it a great pity that such 



THE RAMADAN 109 

a sensible young man should be so hopelessly lost to 
evangelical pagan piety. 

At last we rose and dressed ; and Queequeg, taking a 
prodigiously hearty breakfast of chowders of all sorts, so 
that the landlady should not make much profit by reason 
of his Ramadan, we sallied out to board the Pequod, 
sauntering along, and picking our teeth with halibut 
bones. 



CHAPTER XVIII 

HIS MARK 

As we were walking down the end of the wharf toward 
the ship, Queequeg carrying his harpoon, Captain Peleg 
in his gruff voice loudly hailed us from his wigwam, saying 
he had not suspected my friend was a cannibal, and 
furthermore announcing that he let no cannibals on 
board that craft, unless they previously produced their 
papers. 

' What do you mean by that, Captain Peleg ? ' said I, 
now jumping on the bulwarks, and leaving my comrade 
standing on the wharf. 

' I mean,' he replied, ' he must show his papers.' 

' Yea,' said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice, sticking 
his head from behind Peleg 's, out of the wigwam. ' He 
must show that he 's converted. Son of darkness/ he 
added, turning to Queequeg, c art thou at present in 
communion with any Christian church ? ' 

' Why/ said I, ' he 's a member of the First Congrega- 
tional Church/ Here be it said, that many tattooed 
savages sailing in Nantucket ships at last come to be 
converted into the churches. 

' First Congregational Church/ cried Bildad, ' what ! 
that worships in Deacon Deuteronomy Cole man's meeting- 
house ? ' and so saying, taking out his spectacles, he rubbed 
them with his great yellow bandana handkerchief, and 
putting them on very carefully, came out of the wigwam, 
and leaning stiffly over the bulwarks, took a good long 
look at Queequeg. 
IIP 



HIS MARK 111 

* How long hath he been a member ? ' he then said, 
turning to me ; ' not very long, I rather guess, young 
man.' 

4 No/ said Peleg, ' and he hasn't been baptized right 
either, or it would have washed some of that devil's blue 
off his face.' 

' Do tell, now/ cried Bildad, ' is this Philistine a 
regular member of Deacon Deuteronomy's meeting ? 
I never saw him going there, and I pass it every Lord's 
day.' 

' I don't know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy 
or his meeting/ said I, ' all I know is, that Queequeg here 
is a born member of the First Congregational Church. 
He is a deacon himself, Queequeg is.' 

' Young man/ said Bildad sternly, ' thou art skylarking 
with me explain thyself, thou young Hittite. What 
church dost thee mean ? answer me.' 

Finding myself thus hard pushed, I replied, ' I mean, sir, 
the same ancient Catholic Church to which you and I, 
and Captain Peleg there, and Queequeg here, and all of 
us, and every mother's son and soul of us belong ; the 
great and everlasting First Congregation of this whole 
worshipping world ; we all belong to that ; only some of 
us cherish some queer crotchets no ways touching the 
grand belief ; in that we all join hands/ 

' Splice, thou mean'st splice hands/ cried Peleg, draw- 
ing nearer. ' Young man, you 'd better ship for a mis- 
sionary, instead of a foremast hand ; I never heard a 
better sermon. Deacon Deuteronomy why Father 
Mapple himself couldn't beat it, and he 's reckoned some- 
thing. Come aboard, come aboard ; never mind about 
the papers. I say, tell Quohog there what 's that you 
call him ? tell Quohog to step along. By the great 
anchor, what a harpoon he 's got there ! looks like good 
stuff that ; and he handles it about right. I say, Quohog, 



112 MOBY-DICK 

or whatever your name is, did you ever stand in the head 
of a whale-boat ? did you ever strike a fish ? ' 

Without saying a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of 
way, jumped upon the bulwarks, from thence into the 
bows of one of the whale-boats hanging to the side ; and 
then bracing his left knee, and poising his harpoon, cried 
out in some such way as this : 

' Cap'ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere ? 
You see him ? well, spose him one whale eye, well, den ! ' 
and taking sharp aim at it, he darted the iron right over 
old Bildad's broad brim, clean across the ship's decks, 
and struck the glistening tar spot out of sight/ 

' Now, 5 said Queequeg, quietly hauling in the line, 
* spos-ee him whale-e eye ; why, dad whale dead.' 

' Quick, Bildad,' said Peleg to his partner, who, aghast 
at the close vicinity of the flying harpoon, had retreated 
toward the cabin gangway. ' Quick, I say, you, Bildad, 
and get the ship's papers. We must have Hedgehog 
there, I mean Quohog, in one of our boats. Look ye, 
Quohog, we '11 give ye the ninetieth lay, and that 's 
more than ever was given a harpooneer yet out of 
Nantucket.' 

So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy 
Queequeg was soon enrolled among the same ship's 
company to which I myself belonged. 

When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got 
everything ready for signing, he turned to me and said, 
' I guess, Quohog there don't know how to write, does he ? 
I say, Quohog, blast ye ! dost thou sign thy name or 
make thy mark ? ' 

But at this question, Queequeg, who had twice or 
thrice before taken part in similar ceremonies, looked 
no ways abashed ; but taking the offered pen, copied 
upon the paper, in the proper place, an exact counterpart 
of a queer round figure which was tattooed upon his arm ; 



HIS MARK 113 

so that through Captain Peleg's obstinate mistake touch- 
ing his appellative, it stood something like this : 

Quohog. 
his >J< mark. 

Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and stead- 
fastly eyeing Queequeg, and at last rising solemnly and 
fumbling in the huge pockets of his broad-skirted drab 
coat, took out a bundle of tracts, and selecting one entitled 
' The Latter Day Coming ; or No Time to Lose,' placed 
it in Queequeg 's hands, and then grasping them and the 
book with both his, looked earnestly into his eyes, and 
said, ' Son of darkness, I must do my duty by thee ; I am 
part owner of this ship, and feel concerned for the souls of 
all its crew ; if thou still clingest to thy pagan ways, which 
I sadly fear, I beseech thee, remain not for aye a Belial 
bondsman. Spurn the idol Bell, and the hideous dragon ; 
turn from the wrath to come ; mind thine eye, I say ; oh ! 
goodness gracious ! steer clear of the fiery pit ! ' 

Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad's 
language, heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and 
domestic phrases. 

' Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now spoiling 
our harpooneer,' cried Peleg. ' Pious harpooneers never 
make good voyagers it takes the shark out of 'em ; no 
harpooneer is worth a straw who ain't pretty sharkish. 
There was young Nat Swaine, once the bravest boat- 
header out of all Nantucket and the Vineyard ; he joined 
the meeting, and never came to good. He got so 
frightened about his plaguy soul, that he shrinked and 
sheered away from whales, for fear of after-claps, in case 
he got stove and went to Davy Jones.' 

c Peleg ! Peleg ! ' said Bildad, lifting his eyes and hands, 
'thou thyself, as I myself, hast seen many a perilous 
time ; thou knowest, Peleg, what it is to have the fear of 

VOL. I. H 



114 MOBY-DICK 

death ; how, then, can'st thou prate in this ungodly guise. 
Thou beliest thine own heart, Peleg. Tell me, when this 
same Pequod here had her three masts overboard in that 
typhoon on Japan, that same voyage when thou went 
mate with Captain Ahab, didst thou not think of Death 
and the Judgment then ? ' 

' Hear him, hear him now, ' cried Peleg, marching across 
the cabin, and thrusting his hands far down into his 
pockets, ' hear him, all of ye. Think of that ! When 
every moment we thought the ship would sink ! Death 
and the Judgment then ? What ? With all three masts 
making such an everlasting thundering against the side ; 
and every sea breaking over us, fore and aft. Think of 
Death and the Judgment then ? No ! no time to think 
about Death then. Life was what Captain Ahab and I 
was thinking of ; and how to save all hands how to rig 
jury-masts how to get into the nearest port ; that was 
what I was thinking of. } 

Bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked 
on deck, where we followed him. There he stood, very 
quietly overlooking some sail-makers who were mending 
a topsail in the waist. Now and then he stooped to pick 
up a patch, or save an end of the tarred twine, which 
otherwise might have been wasted. 




CHAPTER XIX 

THE PEOPHET 

' SHIPMATES, have ye shipped in that ship ? ' 

Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were 
sauntering away from the water, for the moment each 
occupied with his own thoughts, when the above words 
were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us, 
levelled his massive forefinger at the vessel in question. 
He was but shabbily apparelled in faded jacket and 
patched trowsers ; a rag of a black handkerchief investing 
his neck. A confluent small-pox had in all directions 
flowed over his face, and left it like the complicated ribbed 
bed of a torrent, when the rushing waters have been 
dried up. 

4 Have ye shipped in her ? ' he repeated. 

4 You mean the ship Pequod, I suppose,' said I, trying 
to gain a little more time for an uninterrupted look at him. 

' Ay, the Pequod that ship there/ he said, drawing 
back his whole arm, and then rapidly shoving it straight 
out from him, with the fixed bayonet of his pointed 
finger darted full at the object. 

' Yes,' said I, ' we have just signed the articles.' 

' Anything down there about your souls ? ' 

' About what ? ' 

' Oh, perhaps you hav'n't got any,' he said quickly. 
No matter though, I know many chaps that hav'n't got 

ly, good luck to 'em ; and they are all the better off for 
it. A soul 's a sort of a fifth wheel to a wagon.' 

' What are you jabbering about, shipmate ? ' said I. 

115 

! 



116 MOBY-DICK 

' He 's got enough, though, to make up for all de- 
ficiencies of that sort in other chaps,' abruptly said the 
stranger, placing a nervous emphasis upon the word he. 

' Queequeg,' said I, ' let 's go ; this fellow has broken 
loose from somewhere ; he 's talking about something 
and somebody we don't know.' 

' Stop ! ' cried the stranger. ' Ye said true ye 
hav'n't seen Old Thunder yet, have ye ? ' 

' Who 's Old Thunder ? ' said I, again riveted with the 
insane earnestness of his manner. 

' Captain Ahab.' 

' What ! the captain of our ship, the Pequod ? ' 

' Ay, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by 
that name. Ye hav'n't seen him yet, have ye ? ' 

' No, we hav'n't. He 's sick, they say, but is getting 
better, and will be all right again before long.' 

4 All right again before long ! ' laughed the stranger, 
with a solemnly derisive sort of laugh. ' Look ye ; when 
Captain Ahab is all right, then this left arm of mine will 
be all right ; not before.' 

i What do you know about him ? ' 

' What did they tell you about him ? Say that ! ' 

' They didn't tell much of anything about him ; only 
I 've heard that he 's a good whale -hunter, and a good 
captain to his crew.' 

' That 's true, that 's true yes, both true enough. 
But you must jump when he gives an order. Step and 
growl ; growl and go that 's the word with Captain 
Ahab. But nothing about that thing that happened to 
him off Cape Horn, long ago, when he lay like dead for 
three days and nights ; nothing about that deadly scrim- 
mage with the Spaniard afore the altar in Santa ? heard 
nothing about that, eh ? Nothing about the silver cala- 
bash he spat into ? And nothing about his losing his 
leg last voyage, according to the prophecy. Didn't ye 



THE PROPHET 117 

hear a word about them matters and something more, eh ? 
No, I don't think ye did ; how could ye ? Who knows 
it ? Not all Nantucket, I guess. But hows'ever, may- 
hap, ye Ve heard tell about the leg, and how he lost it ; 
ay> ye have heard of that, I dare say. Oh yes, that 
every one knows a 'most I mean they know he 's only 
one leg ; and that a parmacetti took the other off.' 

4 My friend/ said I, ' what all this gibberish of yours is 
about, I don't know, and I don't much care ; for it seems 
to me that you must be a little damaged in the head. 
But if you are speaking of Captain Ahab of that ship there, 
the Pequod, then let me tell you, that I know all about 
the loss of his leg.' 

' All about it, eh sure you do ? all ? ' 

* Pretty sure.' 

With finger pointed and eye levelled at the Pequod, the 
beggar-like stranger stood a moment, as if in a troubled 
re very ; then starting a little, turned and said, ' Ye Ve 
shipped, have ye ? Names down on the papers ? Well, 
well, what 's signed, is signed ; and what 's to be, will be ; 
and then again, perhaps it won't be, after all. Anyhow, 
it's all fixed and arranged a 'ready ; and some sailors 
or other must go with him, I suppose ; as well these as 
any other men, God pity 'em ! Morning to ye, shipmates, 
morning ; the ineffable heavens bless ye ; I 'm sorry I 
stopped ye.' 

' Look here, friend,' said I, 'if you have anything im- 
portant to tell us, out with it ; but if you are only trying 
to bamboozle us, you are mistaken in your game ; that 's 
all I have to say.' 

' And it 's said very well, and I like to hear a chap talk 
up that way ; you are just the man for him the likes of 
ye. Morning to ye, shipmates, morning ! Oh ! when ye get 
there, tell 'em I Ve concluded not to make one of 'em.' 

' Ah, my dear fellow, you can't fool us that way you 



118 MOBY-DICK 

can't fool us. It is the easiest thing in the world for a man 
to look as if he had a great secret in him.' 

' Morning to ye, shipmates, morning.' 

' Morning it is,' said I. ' Come along, Queequeg, let 's 
leave this crazy man. But stop, tell me your name, will 
you?' 

^Elijah/ 

Elijah ! thought I, and we walked away, both comment- 
ing, after each other's fashion, upon this ragged old sailor ; 
and agreed that he was nothing but a humbug, trying to 
be a bugbear. But we had not gone perhaps above a 
hundred yards, when chancing to turn a corner, and look- 
ing back as I did so, who should be seen but Elijah follow- 
ing us, though at a distance. Somehow, the sight of him 
struck me so, that I said nothing to Queequeg of his being 
behind, but passed on with my comrade, anxious to see 
whether the stranger would turn the same corner that we 
did. He did ; and then it seemed to me that he was 
dogging us, but with what intent I could not for the life 
of me imagine. This circumstance, coupled with his 
ambiguous, half-hinting, half-revealing, shrouded sort of 
talk, now begat in me all kinds of vague wonderments 
and half -apprehensions, and all connected with the 
Pequod ; and Captain Ahab ; and the leg he had lost ; 
and the Cape Horn fit ; and the silver calabash ; and what 
Captain Peleg had said of him, when I left the ship the 
day previous ; and the prediction of the squaw Tistig ; 
and the voyage we had bound ourselves to sail ; and a 
hundred other shadowy things. 

I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah 
was really dogging us or not, and with that intent crossed 
the way with Queequeg, and on that side of it retraced our 
steps. But Elijah passed on, without seeming to notice 
us. This relieved me ; and once more, and finally as it 
seemed to me, I pronounced him in my heart, a humbug. 



CHAPTER XX 



ALL ASTIR 

A DAY or two passed, and there was great activity aboard 
the Pequod. Not only were the old sails being mended, 
but new sails were coming on board, and bolts of canvas, 
and coils of rigging ; in short, everything betokened that 
the ship's preparations were hurrying to a close. Captain 
Peleg seldom or never went ashore, but sat in his wigwam 
keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands : Bildad did all 
the purchasing and providing at the stores ; and the men 
employed in the hold and on the rigging were working till 
long after night-fall. 

On the day following Queequeg's signing the articles, 
word was given at all the inns where the ship's company were 
stopping, that their chests must be on board before night, 
for there was no telling how soon the vessel might be sailing. 
So Queequeg and I got down our traps, resolving, how- 
ever, to sleep ashore till the last. But it seems they always 
give very long notice in these cases, and the ship did not 
sail for several days. But no wonder ; there was a good 
deal to be done, and there is no telling how many things 
to be thought of, before the Pequod was fully equipped. 

Everyone knows what a multitude of things beds, 
saucepans, knives and forks, shovels and tongs, napkins, 
nut -crackers, and what not, are indispensable to the 
business of housekeeping. Just so with whaling, which 
necessitates a three -years' housekeeping upon the wide 
ocean, far from all grocers, costermongers, doctors, bakers, 
and bankers . And though this also holds true of merchant 



120 MOBY-DICK 

vessels, yet not by any means to the same extent as with 
whalemen. For besides the great length of the whaling 
voyage, the numerous articles peculiar to the prosecution 
of the fishery, and the impossibility of replacing them at 
the remote harbours usually frequented, it must be 
remembered, that of all ships, whaling-vessels are the most 
exposed to accidents of all kinds, and especially to the 
destruction and loss of the very things upon which the 
success of the voyage most depends. Hence, the spare 
boats, spare spars, and spare lines and harpoons, and spare 
everythings, almost, but a spare captain and duplicate 
ship. 

At the period of our arrival at the Island, the heaviest 
storage of the Pequod had been almost completed ; com- 
prising her beef, bread, water, fuel, and iron hoops and 
staves. But, as before hinted, for some time there was a 
continual fetching and carrying on board of divers odds 
and ends of things, both large and small. 

Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying 
was Captain Bildad's sister, a lean old lady of a most 
determined and indefatigable spirit, but withal very kind- 
hearted, who seemed resolved that, if she could help it, 
nothing should be found wanting in the Pequod, after 
once fairly getting to sea. At one time she would come 
on board with a jar of pickles for the steward's pantry ; 
another time with a bunch of quills for the chief mate's 
desk, where he kept his log ; a third time with a roll of 
flannel for the small of some one's rheumatic back. Never 
did any woman better deserve her name, which was 
Charity Aunt Charity, as everybody called her. And 
like a sister of charity did this charitable Aunt Charity 
bustle about hither and thither, ready to turn her hand 
and heart to anything that promised to yield safety, 
comfort, and consolation to all on board a ship in which 
her beloved brother Bildad was concerned, and in 



ALL ASTIR 121 

which she herself owned a score or two of well-saved 
dollars. 

But it was startling to see this excellent-hearted 
Quakeress coming on board, as she did the last day, with 
a long oil-ladle in one hand, and a still longer whaling- 
lance in the other. Nor was Bildad himself nor Captain 
Peleg at all backward. As for Bildad, he carried about 
with him a long list of the articles needed, and at every 
fresh arrival, down went his mark opposite that article 
upon the paper. Every once and a while Peleg came 
hobbling out of his whalebone den, roaring at the men 
down the hatchways, roaring up to the riggers at the 
mast-head, and then concluded by roaring back into his 
wigwam. 

During these days of preparation, Queequeg and I often 
visited the craft, and as often I asked about Captain 
Ahab, and how he was, and when he was going to come on 
board his ship. To these questions they would answer, 
that he was getting better and better, and was expected 
aboard every day ; meantime, the two captains, Peleg 
and Bildad, could attend to everything necessary to fit the 
vessel for the voyage. If I had been downright honest 
with myself, I would have seen very plainly in my heart 
that I did but half fancy being committed this way to 
so long a voyage, without once laying my eyes on the man 
who was to be the absolute dictator of it, so soon as the 
ship sailed out upon the open sea. But when a man 
suspects any wrong, it sometimes happens that if he be 
already involved in the matter, he insensibly strives to 
cover up his suspicions even from himself. And much 
this way it was with me. I said nothing, and tried to 
think nothing. 

At last it was given out that some time next day the 
ship would certainly sail. So next morning, Queequeg 
and I took a very early start. 



CHAPTER XXI 

GOING ABOARD 

IT was nearly six o'clock, but only gray imperfect misty 
dawn, when we drew nigh the wharf. 

' There are some sailors running ahead there, if I see 
right/ said I to Queequeg, ' it can't be shadows ; she 's off 
by sunrise, I guess ; come on ! ' 

' Avast ! ' cried a voice, whose owner at the same time 
coming close behind us, laid a hand upon both our 
shoulders, and then insinuating himself between us, stood 
stooping forward a little, in the uncertain twilight, 
strangely peering from Queequeg to me. It was 
Elijah. 

c Going aboard ? ' 

' Hands off, will you,' said I. 

' Lookee here,' said Queequeg, shaking himself, ' go 
'way ! ' 

' Ain't going aboard, then ? ' 

' Yes, we are,' said I, ' but what business is that of 
yours ? Do you know, Mr. Elijah, that I consider you a 
little impertinent ? ' 

' No, no, no ; I wasn't aware of that,' said Elijah, 
slowly and wonderingly looking from me to Queequeg, 
with the most unaccountable glances. 

' Elijah,' said I, ' you will oblige my friend and me by 
withdrawing. We are going to the Indian and Pacific 
Oceans, and would prefer not to be detained.' 

c Ye be, be ye ? Coming back afore breakfast ? ' 

' He 's cracked, Queequeg,' said I ; ' come on.' 
122 



GOING ABOARD 123 

' Halloa ! ' cried stationary Elijah, hailing us when we 
had removed a few paces. 

' Never mind him/ said I ; ' Queequeg, come on. 5 

But he stole up to us again, and suddenly clapping his 
hand on my shoulder, said, ' Did ye see anything looking 
like men going toward that ship a while ago ? ' 

Struck by this plain matter-of-fact question, I answered, 
saying, ' Yes, I thought I did see four or five men ; but it 
was too dim to be sure.' 

' Very dim, very dim,' said Elijah. ' Morning to ye.' 

Once more we quitted him ; but once more he came 
softly after us ; and touching my shoulder again, said, 
4 See if you can find 'em now, will ye ? ' 

' Find who ? ' 

* Morning to ye ! morning to ye ! ' he rejoined, again 
moving off. ' Oh ! I was going to warn ye against 
but never mind, never mind it 's all one, all in the 
family too ; sharp frost this morning, ain't it ? Good- 
bye to ye. Shan't see ye again very soon, I guess ; unless 
it 's before the Grand Jury.' And with these cracked 
words he finally departed, leaving me, for the moment, in 
no small wonderment at his frantic impudence. 

At last, stepping on board the Peqiiod, we found every- 
thing in profound quiet, not a soul moving. The cabin 
entrance was locked within ; the hatches were all on, and 
lumbered with coils of rigging. Going forward to the 
forecastle, we found the slide of the scuttle open. Seeing 
a light, we went down, and found only an old rigger there, 
wrapped in a tattered pea-jacket. He was thrown at 
whole length upon two chests, his face downward and 
enclosed in his folded arms. The profoundest slumber 
slept upon him. 

' Those sailors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have 
gone to ? ' said I, looking dubiously at the sleeper. But 
it seemed that, when on the wharf, Queequeg had not at 



124 MOBY-DICK 

all noticed what I now alluded to ; hence I would have 
thought myself to have been optically deceived in that 
matter, were it not for Elijah's otherwise inexplicable 
question. But I beat the thing down ; and again mark- 
ing the sleeper, jocularly hinted to Queequeg that perhaps 
we had best sit up with the body ; telling him to estab- 
lish himself accordingly. He put his hand upon the 
sleeper's rear, as though feeling if it was soft enough ; and 
then, without more ado, sat quietly down there. 

' Gracious ! Queequeg, don't sit there,' said I. 

c Oh ! perry dood seat,' said Queequeg, ' my country 
way ; won't hurt him face.' 

' Face ! ' said I, ' call that his face ? very benevolent 
countenance then ; but how hard he breathes, he ? s 
heaving himself ; get off, Queequeg, you are heavy, it 's 
grinding the face of the poor. Get off, Queequeg ! Look, 
he '11 twitch you off soon. I wonder he don't wake.' 

Queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of 
the sleeper, and lighted his tomahawk-pipe. I sat at the 
feet. We kept the pipe passing over the sleeper, from 
one to the other. Meanwhile, upon questioning him in 
his broken fashion, Queequeg gave me to understand 
that, in his land, owing to the absence of settees and sofas 
of all sorts, the king, chiefs, and great people generally, 
were in the custom of fattening some of the lower orders 
for ottomans ; and to furnish a house comfortably in that 
respect, you had only to buy up eight or ten lazy fellows, 
and lay them round in the piers and alcoves. Besides, 
it was very convenient on an excursion ; much better 
than those garden-chairs which are convertible into 
walking-sticks ; upon occasion, a chief calling his attend- 
ant, and desiring him to make a settee of himself 
under a spreading tree, perhaps in some damp marshy 
place. 

While narrating these things, every time Queequeg 



GOING ABOARD 125 

received the tomahawk from me, he flourished the hatchet - 
side of it over the sleeper's head. 

' What 's that for, Queequeg ? ' 

' Perry easy, kill-e ; oh ! perry easy ! ' 

He was going on with some wild reminiscences about 
his tomahawk-pipe, which, it seemed, had in its two uses 
both brained his foes and soothed his soul, when we were 
directly attracted to the sleeping rigger. The strong 
vapour now completely filling the contracted hole, it began 
to tell upon him. He breathed with a sort of muffledness ; 
then seemed troubled in the nose ; then revolved over 
once or twice ; then sat up and rubbed his eyes. 

4 Halloa ! ' he breathed at last, ' who be ye smokers ? ' 

' Shipped men/ answered I. c When does she sail ? ' 

' Ay, ay, ye are going in her, be ye ? She sails to- 
day. The captain came aboard last night.' 

' What captain ? Ahab ? ' 

' Who but him indeed ? ' 

I was going to ask him some further questions concern- 
ing Ahab, when we heard a noise on deck. 

' Halloa ! Starbuck 's astir,' said the rigger. ' He 's 
a lively chief mate, that ; .good man, and a pious ; but 
all alive now, I must turn to.' And so saying he went on 
deck, and we followed. 

It was now clear sunrise. Soon the crew came on board 
in twos and threes ; the riggers bestirred themselves ; the 
mates were actively engaged ; and several of the shore 
people were busy in bringing various last things on board. 
Meanwhile Captain Ahab remained invisibly enshrined 
within his cabin. 



CHAPTER XXII 

MERRY CHRISTMAS 

AT length, toward noon, upon the final dismissal of the 
ship's riggers, and after the Pequod had been hauled out 
from the wharf, and after the ever-thoughtful Charity 
had come off in a whale-boat, with her last gift a night- 
cap for Stubb, the second mate, her brother-in-law, and 
a spare Bible for the steward after all this, the two 
captains, Peleg and Bildad, issued from the cabin, and 
turning to the chief mate, Peleg said : 

' Now, Mr. Starbuck, are you sure everything is right ? 
Captain Ahab is all ready just spoke to him nothing 
more to be got from shore, eh ? Well, call all hands, 
then. Muster 'em aft here blast 'em ! ' 

' No need of profane words, however great the hurry, 
Peleg,' said Bildad, ' but away with thee, friend Starbuck, 
and do our bidding.' 

How now ! Here upon the very point of starting for 
the voyage, Captain Peleg and Captain Bildad were going 
it with a high hand on the quarter-deck, just as if they 
were to be joint-commanders at sea, as well as to all 
appearances in port. And, as for Captain Ahab, no sign 
of him was yet to be seen ; only, they said he was in the 
cabin. But then, the idea was, that his presence was by 
no means necessary in getting the ship under weigh, and 
steering her well out to sea. Indeed, as that was not at 
all his proper business, but the pilot's ; and as he was not 
yet completely recovered so they said therefore, Cap- 
tain Ahab stayed below. And all this seemed natural 

126 



MEKRY CHRISTMAS 127 

enough ; especially as in the merchant service many 
captains never show themselves on deck for a consider- 
able time after heaving up the anchor, but remain over 
the cabin table, having a farewell merry-making with 
their shore friends, before they quit the ship for good 
with the pilot. 

But there was not much chance to think over the 
matter, for Captain Peleg was now all alive. He seemed to 
do most of the talking and commanding, and not Bildad. 

' Aft here, ye sons of bachelors,' he cried, as the sailors 
lingered at the mainmast. ' Mr. Starbuck, drive 'em 
aft.' 

' Strike the tent there ! ' was the next order. As I 
hinted before, this whalebone marquee was never pitched 
except in port ; and on board the Pequod, for thirty years, 
the order to strike the tent was well known to be the next 
thing to heaving up the anchor. 

' Man the capstan ! Blood and thunder ! jump ! ' 
was the next command, and the crew sprang for the 
handspikes. 

Now, in getting under weigh, the station generally 
occupied by the pilot is the forward part of the ship. 
And here Bildad, who, with Peleg, be it known, in addi- 
tion to his other offices, was one of the licensed pilots of 
the port he being suspected to have got himself made a 
pilot in order to save the Nantucket pilot -fee to all the 
ships he was concerned in, for he never piloted any other 
craft Bildad, I say, might now be seen actively engaged 
in looking over the bows for the approaching anchor, 
and at intervals singing what seemed a dismal stave of 
psalmody, to cheer the hands at the windlass, who roared 
forth some sort of a chorus about the girls in Booble Alley, 
with hearty goodwill. Nevertheless, not three days 
previous, Bildad had told them that no profane songs 
would be allowed on board the Pequod, particularly in 




128 MOBY-DICK 

getting under weigh ; and Charity, his sister, had placed 
a small choice copy of Watts in each seaman's berth. 

Meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, Captain 
Peleg ripped and swore astern in the most frightful 
manner. I almost thought he would sink the ship before 
the anchor could be got up ; involuntarily I paused on my 
handspike, and told Queequeg to do the same, thinking 
of the perils we both ran, in starting on the voyage with 
such a devil for a pilot. I was comforting myself, how- 
ever, with the thought that in pious Bildad might be 
found some salvation, spite of his seven hundred and 
seventy-seventh lay ; when I felt a sudden sharp poke 
in my rear, and turning round, was horrified at the 
apparition of Captain Peleg in the act of withdrawing 
his leg from my immediate vicinity. That was my first 
kick. 

' Is that the way they heave in the marchant service ? ' 
he roared. ' Spring, thou sheep-head ; spring, and break 
thy backbone ! Why don't ye spring, I say, all of ye 
spring ! Quohag ! spring, thou chap with the red 
whiskers ; spring there, Scotch-cap ; spring, thou green 
pants. Spring, I say, all of ye, and spring your eyes out ! ' 
And so saying, he moved along the windlass, here and 
there using his leg very freely, while imperturbable Bildad 
kept leading off with his psalmody. Thinks I, Captain 
Peleg must have been drinking something to-day. 

At last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off 
we glided. It was a short, cold Christmas ; and as the 
short northern day merged into night, we found ourselves 
almost broad upon the wintry ocean, whose freezing spray 
cased us in ice, as in polished armour. The long rows of 
teeth on the bulwarks glistened in the moonlight ; and 
like the white ivory tusks of some huge elephant, vast 
curving icicles depended from the bows. 

Lank Bildad, as pilot, headed the first watch, and ever 



MERRY CHRISTMAS 129 

and anon, as the old craft deep dived into the green seas, 
and sent the shivering frost all over her, and the winds 
howled, and the cordage rang, his steady notes were 
heard, 

* Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood, 

Stand dressed in living green. 

So to the Jews old Canaan stood, 

While Jordan rolled between.' 

Never did those sweet words sound more sweetly to me 
than then. They were full of hope and fruition. Spite 
of this frigid winter night in the boisterous Atlantic, 
spite of my wet feet and wetter jacket, there was yet, it 
then seemed to me, many a pleasant haven in store ; and 
meads and glades so eternally vernal, that the grass shot 
up by the spring, untrodden, unwilted, remains at 
midsummer. 

At last we gained such an offing, that the two pilots 
were needed no longer. The stout sail-boat that had 
accompanied us began ranging alongside. 

It was curious and not unpleasing, how Peleg and Bildad 
were affected at this juncture, especially Captain Bildad. 
For loath to depart, yet ; very loath to leave, for good, 
a ship bound on so long and perilous a voyage beyond 
both stormy Capes ; a ship in which some thousands of 
his hard-earned dollars were invested ; a ship, in which 
an old shipmate sailed as captain ; a man almost as old 
as he, once more starting to encounter all the terrors of 
the pitiless jaw ; loath to say good-bye to a thing so every 
way brimful of every interest to him, poor old Bildad 
lingered long ; paced the deck with anxious strides ; ran 
down into the cabin to speak another farewell word there ; 
again came on deck, and looked to windward ; looked 
toward the wide and endless waters, only bounded by the 
* r-off unseen Eastern Continents ; looked toward the 

VOL. I. I 



130 MOBY-DICK 

land ; looked aloft ; looked right and left ; looked every- 
where and nowhere ; and at last, mechanically coiling 
a rope upon its pin, convulsively grasped stout Peleg 
by the hand, and holding up a lantern, for a moment stood 
gazing heroically in his face, as much as to say, * Never- 
theless, friend Peleg, I can stand it ; yes, I can.' 

As for Peleg himself, he took it more like a philosopher ; 
but for all his philosophy, there was a tear twinkling in 
his eye, when the lantern came too near. And he, too, 
did not a little run from cabin to deck now a word 
below, and now a word with Starbuck, the chief mate. 

But, at last, he turned to his comrade, with a final sort 
of look about him, 4 Captain Bildad come, old ship- 
mate, we must go. Back the main-yard there ! Boat 
ahoy ! Stand by to come close alongside, now ! Careful, 
careful ! come, Bildad, boy say your last. Luck to ye, 
Starbuck luck to ye, Mr. Stubb luck to ye, Mr. Flask 
good-bye, and good luck to ye all and this day three 
years I '11 have a hot supper smoking for ye in old 
Nantucket. Hurrah and away ! ' 

' God bless ye, and have ye in His holy keeping, men/ 
murmured old Bildad, almost incoherently. ' I hope 
ye '11 have fine weather now, so that Captain Ahab may 
soon be moving among ye a pleasant sun is all he needs, 
and ye '11 have plenty of them in the tropic voyage ye go. 
Be careful in the hunt, ye mates. Don't stave the boats 
needlessly, ye harpooneers ; good white cedar plank is 
raised full three per cent, within the year. Don't forget 
your prayers, either. Mr. Starbuck, mind that cooper 
don't waste the spare staves. Oh ! the sail-needles are 
in the green locker ! Don't whale it too much a Lord's 
days, men ; but don't miss a fair chance either, that 's 
rejecting Heaven's good gifts. Have an eye to the 
molasses tierce, Mr. Stubb ; it was a little leaky, I thought. 
If ye touch at the islands, Mr. Flask, beware of fornica- 



MERRY CHRISTMAS 131 

tion. Good-bye, good-bye ! Don't keep that cheese too 
long down in the hold, Mr. Starbuck ; it '11 spoil. Be 
careful with the butter twenty cents the pound it was, 
and mind ye, if 

' Come, come, Captain Bildad ; stop palavering, 
away ! ' and with that, Peleg hurried him over the side, 
and both dropped into the boat. 

Ship and boat diverged ; the cold, damp night breeze 
blew between ; a screaming gull flew overhead ; the two 
hulls wildly rolled ; we gave three heavy-hearted cheers, 
and blindly plunged like fate into the lone Atlantic. 



CHAPTER XXIII 

THE LEE SHORE 

SOME chapters back, one Bulkington was spoken of, a tall, 
new-landed mariner, encountered in New Bedford at the 
inn. 

When on that shivering winter's night the Pequod 
thrust her vindictive bows into the cold malicious waves, 
who should I see standing at her helm but Bulkington ! 
I looked with sympathetic awe and fearfulness upon the 
man, who in mid- winter just landed from a four years' 
dangerous voyage, could so unrestingly push off again 
for still another tempestuous term. The land seemed 
scorching to his feet. Wonderfullest things are ever the 
unmentionable ; deep memories yield no epitaphs ; this 
six-inch chapter is the stoneless grave of Bulkington. Let 
me only say that it fared with him as with the storm-tossed 
ship, that miserably drives along the leeward land. The 
port would fain give succour ; the port is pitiful ; in the 
port is safety, comfort, hearthstone, supper, warm 
blankets, friends, all that 's kind to our mortalities. But 
in that gale, the port, the land, is that ship's direst 
jeopardy ; she must fly all hospitality ; one touch of land, 
though it but graze the keel, would make her shudder 
through and through. With all her might she crowds all 
sail off shore ; in so doing, fights 'gainst the very winds 
that fain would blow her homeward ; seeks all the lashed 
sea's landlessness again ; for refuge's sake forlornly 
rushing into peril ; her only friend her bitterest foe ! 

Know ye, now, Bulkington ? Glimpses do ye seem to 

132 



THE LEE SHORE 133 

see of that mortally intolerable truth ; that all deep, 
earnest thinking is but the intrepid effort of the soul to 
keep the open independence of her sea ; while the wildest 
winds of heaven and earth conspire to cast her on the 
treacherous, slavish shore ? 

But as in landlessness alone resides the highest truth, 
shoreless, indefinite as God so, better is it to perish in 
that howling infinite, than be ingloriously dashed upon 
the lee, even if that were safety ! For worm-like, then, 
oh ! who would craven crawl to land ! Terrors of the 
terrible ! is all this agony so vain ? Take heart, take 
heart, Bulkington ! Bear thee grimly, demigod ! Up 
from the spray of thy ocean-perishing straight up, 
leaps thy apotheosis ! 



CHAPTER XXIV 

THE ADVOCATE 

As Queequeg and I are now fairly embarked in this busi- 
ness of whaling ; and as this business of whaling has some- 
how come to be regarded among landsmen as a rather 
unpoetical and disreputable pursuit ; therefore, I am all 
anxiety to convince ye, ye landsmen, of the injustice 
hereby done to us hunters of whales. 

In the first place, it may be deemed almost superfluous 
to establish the fact, that among people at large, the 
business of whaling is not accounted on a level with what 
are called the liberal professions. If a stranger were 
introduced into any miscellaneous metropolitan society, 
it would but slightly advance the general opinion of his 
merits, were he presented to the company as a harpooneer, 
say ; and if in emulation of the naval officers he should 
append the initials S.W.F. (Sperm Whale Fishery) to 
his visiting card, such a procedure would be deemed pre- 
eminently presuming and ridiculous. 

Doubtless one leading reason why the world declines 
honouring us whalemen is this : they think that, at best, 
our vocation amounts to a butchering sort of business ; 
and that when actively engaged therein, we are surrounded 
by all manner of defilements. Butchers we are, that is 
true. But butchers, also, and butchers of the bloodiest 
badge, have been all Martial Commanders whom the world 
invariably delights to honour. And as for the matter of 
the alleged uncleanliness of our business, ye shall soon 
be initiated into certain facts hitherto pretty generally 

134 



THE ADVOCATE 185 

unknown, and which, upon the whole, will triumphantly 
plant the sperm whale-ship at least among the cleanliest 
things of this tidy earth. But even granting the charge 
in question to be true ; what disordered slippery decks 
of a whale-ship are comparable to the unspeakable carrion 
of those battlefields from which so many soldiers return 
to drink in all ladies' plaudits ? And if the idea of peril 
so much enhances the popular conceit of the soldier's 
profession ; let me assure ye that many a veteran who 
has freely marched up to a battery, would quickly recoil 
at the apparition of the sperm whale's vast tail, fanning 
into eddies the air over his head. For what are the 
comprehensible terrors of man compared with the inter- i 
linked terrors and wonders of God ! 

But, though the world scouts at us whale-hunters, yet 
does it unwittingly pay us the profoundest homage ; yea, 
an all-abounding adoration ! for almost all the tapers, 
lamps, and candles that burn round the globe, burn, 
as before so many shrines, to our glory ! 

But look at this matter in other lights ; weigh it in all 
sorts of scales ; see what we whalemen are, and have been. 

Why did the Dutch in De Witt's time have admirals 
of their whaling-fleets ? Why did Louis xvi. of France, 
at his own personal expense, fit out whaling-ships from 
Dunkirk, and politely invite to that town some score or 
two of families from our own island of Nantucket ? Why 
did Britain between the years 1750 and 1788 pay to her 
whalemen in bounties upward of 1,000,000 ? And 
lastly, how comes it that we whalemen of America now\ 
outnumber all the rest of the banded whalemen hi the \ 
world ; sail a navy of upward of seven hundred vessels ; 
manned by eighteen thousand men ; yearly consuming 
4,000,000 of dollars ; the ships worth, at the time of 
sailing, $20,000,000 ; and every year importing into our 
harbours a well-reaped harvest of $7,000,000. How 



136 MOBY-DICK 

comes all this, if there be not something puissant in 
whaling ? 

But this is not the half ; look again. 
I freely assert, that the cosmopolite philosopher cannot, 
for his life, point out one single peaceful influence, which 
within the last sixty years has operated more potentially 
upon the whole broad world, taken in one aggregate, than 
the high and mighty business of whaling. One way and 
another, it has begotten events so remarkable in them- 
selves, and so continuously momentous in their sequential 
f issues, that whaling may well be regarded as that Egyptian 
/ mother, who bore offspring themselves pregnant from her 
womb. It would be a hopeless, endless task to catalogue 
all these things. Let a handful suffice. For many years 
\ past the whale-ship has been the pioneer in ferreting out 
the remotest and least known parts of the earth. She has 
explored seas and archipelagoes which had no chart, 
where no Cook or Vancouver had ever sailed. If Ameri- 
can and European men-of-war now peacefully ride in once 
savage harbours, let them fire salutes to the honour and 
the glory of the whale-ship, which originally showed them 
the way, and first interpreted between them and the 
savages. They may celebrate as they will the heroes 
of exploring expeditions, your Cooks, your Krusen- 
sterns ; but I say that scores of anonymous captains 
have sailed out of Nantucket, that were as great, and 
greater than your Cook and your Krusenstern. For in 
their succourless empty-handedness, they, in the heathen- 
ish sharked waters, and by the beaches of unrecorded, 
javelin islands, battled with virgin wonders and terrors 
that Cook with all his marines and muskets would not 
willingly have dared. All that is made such a flourish of 
in the old South Sea Voyages, those things were but the 
lifetime commonplaces of our heroic Nantucketers. 
Often, adventures which Vancouver dedicates three 



THE ADVOCATE 137 

chapters to, these men accounted unworthy of being set 
down in the ship's common log. Ah, the world ! Oh, 
the world ! 

Until the whale-fishery rounded Cape Horn, no com- 
merce but colonial, scarcely any intercourse but colonial, 
was carried on between Europe and the long line of the 
opulent Spanish provinces on the Pacific coast. It was 
the whaleman who first broke through the jealous policy 
of the Spanish crown, touching those colonies ; and, if 
space permitted, it might be distinctly shown how from 
those whalemen at last eventuated the liberation of Peru, 
Chili, and Bolivia from the yoke of Old Spain, and the 
establishment of the eternal democracy in those parts. 

That great America on the other side of the sphere, 
Australia, was given to the enlightened world by the 
whaleman. After its first blunder-born discovery by a 
Dutchman, all other ships long shunned those shores as 
pestiferously barbarous ; but the whale -ship touched 
there. The whale-ship is the true mother of that now 
mighty colony. Moreover, in the infancy of the first 
Australian settlement, the emigrants were several times 
saved from starvation by the benevolent biscuit of the 
whale -ship luckily dropping an anchor in their waters. 
The uncounted isles of all Polynesia confess the same 
truth, and do commercial homage to the whale-ship, that 
cleared the way for the missionary and the merchant, and 
in many cases carried the primitive missionaries to their 
first destinations. If that double -bolted land, Japan, 
is ever to become hospitable, it is the whale-ship alone 
to whom the credit will be due ; for already she is on the 
threshold. 

But if, in the face of all this, you still declare that 
whaling has no aesthetically noble associations connected 
with it, then am I ready to shiver fifty lances with you 

jre, and unhorse you with a split helmet every time. 



138 MOBY-DICK 

The whale has no famous author, and whaling no 
famous chronicler, you will say. 

The whale no famous author, and whaling no famous 
chronicler ? Who wrote the first account of our levia- 
than ? Who but mighty Job ! And who composed the 
first narrative of a whaling voyage ? Who, but no less 
a prince than Alfred the Great, who, with his own royal 
pen, took down the words from Other, the Norwegian 
whale -hunter of those times ! And who pronounced our 
glowing eulogy in Parliament ? Who, but Edmund 
Burke ! 

True enough, but then whalemen themselves are poor 
devils ; they have no good blood in their veins. 

No good blood in their veins ? They have something 
better than royal blood there. The grandmother of 
Benjamin Franklin was Mary Morrel ; afterward, by 
marriage, Mary Folger, one of the old settlers of Nantucket ? 
and the ancestress to a long line of Folgers and har- 
pooneers all kith and kin to noble Benjamin this day 
darting the barbed iron from one side of the world to 
the other. 

Good again ; but then all confess that somehow whal- 
ing is not respectable. 

Whaling not respectable ? Whaling is imperial ! By old 
English statutory law, the whale is declared 'a royal fish.' l 

Oh, that 's only nominal ! The whale himself has never 
figured in any grand imposing way. 

The whale never figured in any grand imposing way ? 
In one of the mighty triumphs given to a Roman general 
upon his entering the world's capital, the bones of a whale, 
brought all the way from the Syrian coast, were the most 
conspicuous object in the cymballed procession. 1 

Grant it, since you cite it ; but, say what you will, 
there is no real dignity in whaling. 

1 See subsequent chapters for something more on this head. 






THE ADVOCATE 139 

No dignity in whaling ? The dignity of our calling the 
very heavens attest. Cetus is a constellation in the south ! 
No more ! Drive down your hat in presence of the Czar, 
and take it off to Queequeg ! No more ! I know a man 
that, in his lifetime, has taken three hundred and fifty 
whales. I account that man more honourable than that 
great captain of antiquity who boasted of taking as many 
walled towns. 

And, as for me, if, by any possibility, there be any as 
yet undiscovered prime thing in me ; if I shall ever 
deserve any real repute in that small but high hushed 
world which I might not be unreasonably ambitious of ; 
if hereafter I shall do anything that, upon the whole, 
a man might rather have done than to have left undone ; 
if, at my death, my executors, or more properly my 
creditors, find any precious MSS. in my desk, then here 
I prospectively ascribe all the honour and the glory to 
whaling ; for a whale -ship was my Yale College and my 
Harvard. 



CHAPTER XXV 

POSTSCRIPT 

IN behalf of the dignity of whaling, I would fain advance 
naught but substantiated facts. But after embattling his 
facts, an advocate who should wholly suppress a not 
unreasonable surmise, which might tell eloquently upon his 
cause such an advocate, would he not be blameworthy ? 

It is well known that at the coronation of kings and 
queens, even modern ones, a certain curious process of 
seasoning them for their functions is gone through. There 
is a salt-cellar of state, so called, and there may be a castor 
of state. How they use the salt, precisely who knows ? 
Certain I am, however, that a king's head is solemnly 
oiled at his coronation, even as a head of salad. Can it 
be, though, that they anoint it with a view of making 
its interior run well, as they anoint machinery ? Much 
might be ruminated here, concerning the essential dignity 
of this regal process, because in common life we esteem 
but meanly and contemptibly a fellow who anoints his 
hair, and palpably smells of that anointing. In truth, a 
mature man who uses hair-oil, unless medicinally, that 
man has probably got a quoggy spot in him somewhere. 
As a general rule, he can't amount to much in his totality. 

But the only thing to be considered here, is this what 
kind of oil is used at coronations ? Certainly it cannot 
be olive oil, nor macassar oil, nor castor oil, nor bear's oil, 
nor train oil, nor cod-liver oil. What then can it possibly 
be, but sperm oil in its unmanufactured, unpolluted 
state, the sweetest of all oils ? 

Think of that, ye loyal Britons ! we whalemen supply 
your kings and queens with coronation stuff ! 

140 



CHAPTER XXVI 

KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES 

THE chief mate of the Pequod was Starbuck, a native of 
Nantucket, and a Quaker by descent. He was a long, 
earnest man, and though born on an icy coast, seemed 
well adapted to endure hot latitudes, his flesh being hard 
as twice-baked biscuit. Transported to the Indies, his 
live blood would not spoil like bottled ale. He must have 
been born in some time of general drought and famine, 
or upon one of those fast days for which his state is 
famous. Only some thirty arid summers had he seen ; 
those summers had dried up all his physical superfluous- 
ness. But this, his thinness, so to speak, seemed no more 
the token of wasting anxieties and cares, than it seemed 
the indication of any bodily blight. It was merely the 
condensation of the man. He was by no means ill-look- 
ing ; quite the contrary. His pure tight skin was an 
excellent fit ; and closely wrapped up in it, and embalmed 
with inner health and strength, like a revivified Egyptian, 
this Starbuck seemed prepared to endure for long ages 
to come, and to endure always, as now ; for be it Polar 
snow or torrid sun, like a patent chronometer, his interior 
vitality was warranted to do well in all climates. Look- 
ing into his eyes, you seemed to see there the yet lingering 
images of those thousand-fold perils he had calmly con- 
fronted through life. A staid, steadfast man, whose life 
for the most part was a telling pantomime of action, and 
not a tame chapter of sounds. Yet, for all his hardy 
>briety and fortitude, there were certain qualities in 

141 



142 MOBY-DICK 

him which at times affected, and in some cases seemed well- 
nigh to overbalance all the rest. Uncommonly con- 
scientious for a seaman, and endued with a deep natural 
reverence, the wild watery loneliness of his life did there- 
fore strongly incline him to superstition ; but to that 
sort of superstition, which in some organisations seems 
rather to spring, somehow, from intelligence than from 
ignorance. Outward portents and inward presentiments 
were his. And if at times these things bent the welded 
iron of his soul, much more did his far-away domestic 
memories of his young Cape wife and child tend to bend 
him still more from the original ruggedness of his nature, 
and open him still further to those latent influences which, 
in some honest-hearted men, restrain the gush of dare- 
devil daring, so often evinced by others in the more 
perilous vicissitudes of the fishery. ' I will have no man 
in my boat/ said Starbuck, ' who is not afraid of a whale.' 
By this, he seemed to mean, not only that the most 
reliable and useful courage was that which arises from the 
fair estimation of the encountered peril, but that an 
utterly fearless man is a far more dangerous comrade than 
a coward. 

' Ay, ay/ said Stubb, the second mate, ' Starbuck, 
there, is as careful a man as you '11 find anywhere in this 
fishery.' But we shall ere long see what that word 
' careful ' precisely means when used by a man like Stubb, 
or almost any other whale-hunter. 

Starbuck was no crusader after perils ; in him courage 
was not a sentiment ; but a thing simply useful to him, 
and always at hand upon all mortally practical occasions. 
Besides, he thought, perhaps, that hi this business of 
whaling, courage was one of the great staple outfits of the 
ship, like her beef and her bread, and not to be foolishly 
wasted. Wherefore he had no fancy for lowering for 
whales after sundown ; nor for persisting in fighting a 



KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES 143 

fish that too much persisted in fighting him. For, thought 
Starbuck, I am here in this critical ocean to kill whales 
for my living, and not to be killed by them for theirs ; 
and that hundreds of men had been so killed Starbuck 
well knew. What doom was his own father's ? Where, 
in the bottomless deeps, could he find the torn limbs of 
his brother ? 

With memories like these in him, and, moreover, given 
to a certain superstitiousness, as has been said ; the 
courage of this Starbuck which could, nevertheless, still 
flourish, must indeed have been extreme. But it was not 
in reasonable nature that a man so organised, and with 
such terrible experiences and remembrances as he had ; 
it was not in nature that these things should fail in latently 
engendering an element in him, which, under suitable 
circumstances, would break out from its confinement, 
and burn all his courage up. And brave as he might be, 
it was that sort of bravery chiefly, visible in some intrepid 
men, which, while generally abiding firm in the conflict 
with seas, or winds, or whales, or any of the ordinary 
irrational horrors of the world, yet cannot withstand 
those more terrific, because more spiritual terrors, which 
sometimes menace you from the concentrating brow of an 
enraged and mighty man. 

But were the coming narrative to reveal, in any instance, 
the complete abasement of poor Starbuck's fortitude, 
scarce might I have the heart to write it ; for it is a thing 
most sorrowful, nay shocking, to expose the fall of valour 
in the soul. Men may seem detestable as joint-stock 
companies and nations ; knaves, fools, and murderers 
there may be ; men may have mean and meagre aces ; 
but man, hi the ideal, is so noble and so sparkling, such 
a grand and glowing creature, that over any ignominious 
blemish in him all his fellows should run to throw their 
costliest robes. That immaculate manliness we feel 



144 MOBY-DICK 

within ourselves, so far within us, that it remains intact 
though all the outer character seem gone, bleeds with 
keenest anguish at the undraped spectacle of a valour- 
ruined man. Nor can piety itself, at such a shameful 
sight, completely stifle her upbraidings against the per- 
mitting stars. But this august dignity I treat of, is not 
the dignity of kings and robes, but that abounding dignity 
which has no robed investiture. Thou shalt see it shining 
in the arm that wields a pick or drives a spike ; that 
democratic dignity which, on all hands, radiates without 
end from God ; Himself ! The great God absolute ! 
The centre and circumference of all democracy ! His 
omnipresence, our divine equality ! 

If, then, to meanest mariners, and renegades and casta- 
ways, I shall hereafter ascribe high qualities, though dark ; 
weave round them tragic graces ; if even the most mourn- 
ful, perchance the most abased, among them all, shall at 
times lift himself to the exalted mounts ; if I shall touch 
that workman's arm with some ethereal light ; if I shall 
spread a rainbow over his disastrous set of sun ; then 
against all mortal critics bear me out in it, thou just 
Spirit of Equality, which hast spread one royal mantle 
of humanity over all my kind ! Bear me out in it, thou 
great democratic God ! who didst not refuse to the 
swart convict, Bunyan, the pale, poetic pearl ; Thou 
who didst clothe with doubly hammered leaves of finest 
gold, the stumped and paupered arm of old Cervantes ; 
Thou who didst pick up Andrew Jackson from the pebbles ; 
who didst hurl him upon a war-horse ; who didst thunder 
him higher than a throne ! Thou who, in all Thy mighty, 
earthly marchings, ever cullest Thy selectest champions 
from the kingly commons ; bear me out in it, God ! 



CHAPTER XXVII 

KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES 

STUBB was the second mate. He was a native of Cape 
Cod ; and hence, according to local usage, was called a 
Cape-Cod-man. A happy-go-lucky ; neither craven nor 
valiant ; taking perils as they came with an indifferent 
air ; and while engaged in the most imminent crisis of 
the chase, toiling away, calm and collected as a journey- 
man joiner engaged for the year. Good-humoured, easy, 
and careless, he presided over his whale-boat as if the 
most deadly encounter were but a dinner, and his crew 
all invited guests. He was as particular about the com- 
fortable arrangement of his part of the boat, as an old 
stage-driver is about the snugness of his box. When close 
to the whale, in the very death-lock of the fight, he 
handled his unpitying lance coolly and off-handedly, 
as a whistling tinker his hammer. He would hum over 
his old rigadig tunes while flank and flank with the most 
exasperated monster. Long usage had, for this Stubb, 
converted the jaws of death into an easy-chair. What 
he thought of death itself, there is no telling. Whether 
he ever thought of it at all, might be a question ; but, if 
he ever did chance to cast his mind that way after a com- 
fortable dinner, no doubt, like a good sailor, he took it to 
be a sort of call of the watch to tumble aloft, and bestir 
themselves there, about something which he would find 
out when he obeyed the order, and not sooner. 

What, perhaps, with other things, made Stubb such an 
easy-going, unfearing man, so cheerily trudging off with 

VOL. i. K 



146 MOBY-DICK 

the burden of life in a world full of grave peddlers, all 
bowed to the ground with their packs ; what helped to 
bring about that almost impious good-humour of his ; 
that thing must have been his pipe. For, like his nose, 
his short, black little pipe was one of the regular features 
of his face. You would almost as soon have expected 
him to turn out of his bunk without his nose as without 
his pipe. He kept a whole row of pipes there ready loaded, 
stuck in a rack, within easy reach of his hand ; and, 
whenever he turned in, he smoked them all out in suc- 
cession, lighting one from the other to the end of the 
chapter ; then loading them again to be in readiness anew. 
For, when Stubb dressed, instead of first putting his legs 
into his trowsers, he put his pipe into his mouth. 

I say this continual smoking must have been one 
cause, at least, of his peculiar disposition ; for everyone 
knows that this earthly air, whether ashore or afloat, is 
terribly infected with the nameless miseries of the number- 
less mortals who have died exhaling it ; and as in time 
of the cholera, some people go about with a camphorated 
handkerchief to their mouths ; so, likewise, against all 
mortal tribulations, Stubb 's tobacco smoke might have 
operated as a sort of disinfecting agent. 

The third mate was Flask, a native of Tisbury, in 
Martha's Vineyard. A short, stout, ruddy young fellow, 
very pugnacious concerning whales, who somehow seemed 
to think that the great leviathans had personally and 
hereditarily affronted him ; and therefore it was a sort 
of point of honour with him, to destroy them whenever 
encountered. So utterly lost was he to all sense of 
reverence for the many marvels of their majestic bulk 
and mystic ways ; and so dead to anything like an appre- 
hension of any possible danger from encountering them ; 
that in his poor opinion, the wondrous whale was but a 
species of magnified mouse, or at least water-rat, requiring 



KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES 147 

only a little circumvention and some small application 
of time and trouble in order to kill and boil. This ignor- 
ant, unconscious fearlessness of his made him a little 
waggish in the matter of whales ; he followed these fish 
for the fun of it ; and a three years' voyage round Cape 
Horn was only a jolly joke that lasted that length of time. 
As a carpenter's nails are divided into wrought nails and 
cut nails ; so mankind may be similarly divided. Little 
Flask was one of the wrought ones ; made to clinch tight 
and last long. They called him King-Post on board of the 
Pequod ; because, in form, he could be well likened to the 
short, square timber known by that name in Arctic 
whalers ; and which by the means of many radiating 
side timbers inserted into it, served to brace the ship 
against the icy concussions of those battering seas. 

Now these three mates Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask 
were momentous men. They it was who by universal 
prescription commanded three of the Pequod' & boats as | 
headsmen. In that grand order of battle in which Gap- 
tain Ahab would probably marshal his forces to descend 
on the whales, these three headsmen were as captains 
of companies. Or, being armed with their long keen 
whaling-spears, they were as a picked trio of lancers ; 
even as the harpooneers were flingers of javelins. 

And since in this famous fishery, each mate or heads- 
man, like a Gothic knight of old, is always accompanied 
by his boat-steerer or harpooneer, who in certain con- 
junctures provides him with a fresh lance, when the former 
one has been badly twisted, or elbowed in the assault ; 
and moreover, as there generally subsists between the 
two a close intimacy and friendliness ; it is therefore 
but meet, that in this place we set down who the Pequod 's 
harpooneers were, and to what headsman each of them 
belonged. 

First of all was Queequeg, whom Starbuck, the chief 



148 MOBY-DICK 

mate, had selected for his squire. But Queequeg is 
already known. 

Next was Tashtego, an unmixed Indian from Gay 
Head, the most westerly promontory of Martha's Vine- 
yard, where there still exists the last remnant of a village 
of red men, which has long supplied the neighbouring 
island of Nantucket with many of her most daring har- 
pooneers. In the fishery, they usually go by the generic 
name of Gay-Headers. Tashtego 's long, lean, sable hair, 
his high cheek-bones, and black rounding eyes for an 
Indian, Oriental in their largeness, but Antarctic in their 
glittering expression all this sufficiently proclaimed him 
an inheritor of the unvitiated blood of those proud warrior 
hunters, who, in quest of the great New England moose, 
had scoured, bow in hand, the aboriginal forests of the 
main. But no longer snuffing in the trail of the wild 
beasts of the woodland, Tashtego now hunted in the wake 
of the great whales of the sea ; the unerring harpoon of 
the son fitly replacing the infallible arrow of the sires. 
To look at the tawny brawn of his lithe snaky limbs, you 
would almost have credited the superstitions of some of 
the earlier Puritans, and half-believed this wild Indian 
to be a son of the Prince of the Powers of the Air. Tash- 
tego was Stubb the second mate's squire. 

Third among the harpooneers was Daggoo, a gigantic, 
coal - black negro-savage, with a lion -like tread an 
Ahasuerus to behold. Suspended from his ears were 
two golden hoops, so large that the sailors called them 
ring-bolts, and would talk of securing the topsail halyards 
to them. In his youth Daggoo had voluntarily shipped 
on board of a whaler, lying in a lonely bay on his native 
coast. And never having been anywhere in the world 
but in Africa, Nantucket, and the pagan harbours most 
frequented by whalemen ; and having now led for many 
years the bold life of the fishery in the ships of owners un- 



I 



KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES 149 

commonly heedful of what manner of men they shipped ; 
Daggoo retained all his barbaric virtues, and erect as a 
giraffe, moved about the decks in all the pomp of six feet 
five in his socks. There was a corporeal humility in 
looking up at him ; and a white man standing before him 
seemed a white flag come to beg truce of a fortress. 
Curious to tell, this imperial negro, Ahasuerus Daggoo, 
was the squire of little Flask, who looked like a chess-man 
beside him. As for the residue of the Pequod'B company, 
be it said, that at the present day not one in two of the 
many thousand men before the mast employed in the 
American whale-fishery are Americans born, though pretty 
nearly all the officers are. Herein it is the same with 
the American whale-fishery as with the American army 
and military and merchant navies, and the engineering 
forces employed in the construction of the American 
canals and railroads. The same, I say, because in all 
these cases the native American liberally provides the 
brains, the rest of the world as generously supplying the 
muscles. No small number of these whaling seamen 
belong to the Azores, where the outward-bound Nan- 
tucket whalers frequently touch to augment their crews 
from the hardy peasants of those rocky shores. In like 
manner, the Greenland whalers sailing out of Hull or 
London put in at the Shetland Islands, to receive the 
full complement of their crew. Upon the passage home- 
ward, they drop them there again. How it is, there is 
no telling, but Islanders seem to make the best whalemen. 
They were nearly all Islanders in the Pequod, ' Isolatoes ' 
too, I call such, not acknowledging the common continent 
of men, but each Isolate living on a separate continent 
of his own. Yet now, federated along one keel, what a 
set these Isolatoes were ! An Anacharsis Clootz deputa- 
tion from all the isles of the sea, and all the ends of the 
earth, accompanying Old Ahab in the Pequod to lay the 



150 MOBY-DICK 

world's grievances before that bar from which not very 
many of them ever come back. Black Little Pip he 
never did oh, no ! he went before. Poor Alabama boy ! 
On the grim Pequod's forecastle, ye shall ere long see him, 
beating his tambourine ; prelusive of the eternal time, 
when sent for, to the great quarter-deck on high, he was 
bid strike in with angels, and beat his tambourine in 
glory ; called a coward here, hailed a hero there ! 



CHAPTER XXVIII 

AHAB 

FOB several days after leaving Nantucket, nothing above 
hatches was seen of Captain Ahab. The mates regularly 
relieved each other at the watches, and for aught that 
could be seen to the contrary, they seemed to be the only 
commanders of the ship ; only they sometimes issued from 
the cabin with orders so sudden and peremptory, that 
after all it was plain they but commanded vicariously. 
Yes, their supreme lord and dictator was there, though 
hitherto unseen by any eyes not permitted to penetrate 
into the now sacred retreat of the cabin. 

Every time I ascended to the deck from my watches 
below, I instantly gazed aft to mark if any strange face 
were visible ; for my first vague disquietude touching 
the unknown captain, now in the seclusion of the sea, 
became almost a perturbation. This was strangely 
heightened at times by the ragged Elijah's diabolical 
incoherences uninvitingly recurring to me, with a subtle 
energy I could not have before conceived of. But poorly 
could I withstand them, much as in other moods I was 
almost ready to smile at the solemn whimsicalities of that 
outlandish prophet of the wharves. But whatever it was 
of apprehensiveness or uneasiness to call it so which I 
felt, yet whenever I came to look about me in the ship, 
it seemed against all warranty to cherish such emotions. 
For though the harpooneers, with the great body of the 
crew, were a far more barbaric, heathenish, and motley 
set than any of the tame merchant-ship companies which 

151 



152 MOBY-DICK 

my previous experiences had made me acquainted with, 
still I ascribed this and rightly ascribed it to the fierce 
uniqueness of the very nature of that wild Scandinavian 
vocation in which I had so abandonedly embarked. But 
it was especially the aspect of the three chief officers of 
the ship, the mates, which was most forcibly calculated 
to allay these colourless misgivings, and induce confidence 
and cheerfulness in every presentment of the voyage. 
Three better, more likely sea-officers and men, each in 
his own different way, could not readily be found, and 
they were every one of them Americans ; a Nantucketer, 
a Vineyarder, a Cape man. Now, it being Christmas 
when the ship shot from out her harbour, for a space we 
had biting Polar weather, though all the time running 
away from it to the southward ; and by every degree 
and minute of latitude which we sailed, gradually leaving 
that merciless winter, and all its intolerable weather 
behind us. It was one of those less lowering, but still 
gray and gloomy enough mornings of the transition, when 
with a fair wind the ship was rushing through the water 
with a vindictive sort of leaping and melancholy rapidity, 
that as I mounted to the deck at the call of the forenoon 
watch, so soon as I levelled my glance toward the tanrail, 
foreboding shivers ran over me. Reality outran appre- 
hension ; .Captain Ahab stood upon his quarter-deck. 

There seemed no sign of common bodily illness about 
him, nor of the recovery from any. He looked like a man 
cut away from the stake, when the fire has overrunningly 
wasted all the limbs without consuming them, or taking 
away one particle from their compacted aged robustness. 
His whole high, broad form, seemed made of solid bronze, 
and shaped in an unalterable mould, like Cellini's cast 
Perseus. Threading its way out from among his gray 
hairs, and continuing right down one side of his tawny 
scorched face and neck, till it disappeared in his clothing, 






AHAB 153 

you saw a slender rod-like mark, lividly whitish. It 
resembled that perpendicular seam sometimes made in 
the straight, lofty trunk of a great tree, when the upper 
lightning tearingly darts down it, and without wrenching 
a single twig, peels and grooves out the bark from top to 
bottom, ere running off into the soil, leaving the tree still 
greenly alive, but branded. Whether that mark was born 
with him, or whether it was the scar left by some desperate 
wound, no one could certainly say. By some tacit con- 
sent, throughout the voyage little or no allusion was made 
to it, especially by the mates. But once Tashtego's 
senior, an old Gay-Head Indian among the crew, super- 
stitiously asserted that not till he was full forty years 
old did Ahab become that way branded, and then it 
came upon him, not in the fury of any mortal fray, but 
in an elemental strife at sea. Yet, this wild hint seemed 
inferentially negatived by what a gray Manxman in- 
sinuated, an old sepulchral man, who, having never 
before sailed out of Nantucket, had never ere this laid eye 
upon wild Ahab. Nevertheless, the old sea-traditions, 
the immemorial credulities, popularly invested this old 
Manxman with preternatural powers of discernment. 
So that no white sailor seriously contradicted him when 
he said that if ever Captain Ahab should be tranquilly 
laid out which might hardly come to pass, so he muttered 
then, whoever should do that last office for the dead 
would find a birth-mark on him from crown to sole. 

So powerfully did the whole grim aspect of Ahab affect 
me, and the livid brand which streaked it, that for the 
first few moments I hardly noted that not a little of this 
overbearing grimness was owing to the barbaric white 
leg upon which he partly stood. It had previously come 
to me that this ivory leg had at sea been fashioned from 
the polished bone of the sperm whale's jaw. * Ay, he 
was dismasted off Japan,' said the old Gay-Head Indian 



154 MOBY-DICK 

once ; ' but like his dismasted craft, he shipped another 
mast without coming home for it. He has a quiver of 'em.' 

I was struck with the singular posture he maintained. 
Upon each side of the Pequod's quarter-deck, and pretty 
close to the mizen shrouds, there was an auger-hole, 
bored about half an inch or so, into the plank. His bone 
leg steadied in that hole ; one arm elevated, and holding 
by a shroud ; Captain Ahab stood erect, looking straight 
out beyond the ship's ever-pitching prow. There was an 
infinity of firmest fortitude, a determinate, unsurrender- 
able wilfulness, in the fixed and fearless, forward dedi- 
cation of that glance. Not a word he spoke ; nor did 
his officers say aught to him ; though by all their minutest 
gestures and expressions, they plainly showed the uneasy, 
if not painful, consciousness of being under a troubled 
master-eye. And not only that, but moody stricken 
Ahab stood before them with a crucifixion in his face ; 
in all the nameless regal overbearing dignity of some 
mighty woe. 

Ere long, from his first visit in the air, he withdrew into 
his cabin. But after that morning, he was every day 
visible to the crew ; either standing in his pivot -hole, 
or seated upon an ivory stool he had ; or heavily walking 
the deck. As the sky grew less gloomy ; indeed, began 
to grow a little genial, he became still less and less a recluse ; 
as if, when the ship had sailed from home, nothing but 
the dead wintry bleakness of the sea had then kept him 
so secluded. And, by and by, it came to pass, that he 
was almost continually in the air ; but, as yet, for all that 
he said, or perceptibly did, on the at last sunny deck, he 
seemed as unnecessary there as another mast. But the 
Pequod was only making a passage now ; not regularly 
cruising ; nearly all whaling preparatives needing super- 
vision the mates were fully competent to, so that there 
was little or nothing, out of himself, to employ or excite 



AHAB 155 

Ahab now ; and thus chase away, for that one interval, 
the clouds that layer upon layer were piled upon his 
brow, as ever all clouds choose the loftiest peaks to pile 
themselves upon. 

Nevertheless, ere long, the warm, warbling persuasive- 
ness of the pleasant, holiday weather we came to, seemed 
gradually to charm him from his mood. For, as when the 
red-cheeked, dancing girls, April and May, trip home to 
the wintry, misanthropic woods ; even the barest, 
ruggedest, most thunder-cloven old oak will at least send 
forth some few green sprouts, to welcome such glad- 
hearted visitants ; so Ahab did, in the end, a little 
respond to the playful allurings of that girlish air. More 
than once did he put forth the faint blossom of a look, 
which, in any other man, would have soon flowered out 
in a smile. 






CHAPTER XXIX 

TO HIM, STUBB 

SOME days elapsed, and ice and icebergs all astern, the 
Pequod now went rolling through the bright Quito spring, 
which, at sea, almost perpetually reigns on the threshold 
of the eternal August of the Tropic. The warmly cool, 
clear, ringing, perfumed, overflowing, redundant days, 
were as crystal goblets of Persian sherbet, heaped up 
flaked up, with rose-water snow. The starred and stately 
nights seemed haughty dames in jewelled velvets, nursing 
at home in lonely pride, the memory of their absent 
conquering Earls, the golden helmeted suns ! For 
sleeping man, 'twas hard to choose between such winsome 
days and such seducing nights. But all the witcheries 
of that unwaning weather did not merely lend new spells 
and potencies to the outward world. Inward they 
turned upon the soul, especially when the still mild hours 
of eve came on ; then, memory shot her crystals as the 
clear ice most forms of noiseless twilights. And all these 
subtle agencies, more and more they wrought on Ahab's 
texture. 

Old age is always wakeful ; as if, the longer linked with 
life, the less man has to do with aught that looks like 
death. Among sea-commanders, the old graybeards will 
oftenest leave their berths to visit the night-cloaked deck. 
It was so with Ahab ; only that now, of late, he seemed 
so much to live in the open air, that truly speaking, his 
visits were more to the cabin, than from the cabin to the 
planks. ' It feels like going down into one's tomb,' 

156 



ENTER AHAB 157 

he would mutter to himself, ' for an old captain like me 
to be descending this narrow scuttle, to go to my grave- 
dug berth/ 

So, almost every twenty-four hours, when the watches 
of the night were set, and the band on deck sentinelled 
the slumbers of the band below ; and when if a rope was 
to be hauled upon the forecastle, the sailors flung it not 
rudely down, as by day, but with some cautiousness 
dropped it to its place, for fear of disturbing their slumber- 
ing shipmates ; when this sort of steady quietude would 
begin to prevail, habitually, the silent steersman would 
watch the cabin-scuttle ; and ere long the old man would 
emerge, gripping at the iron banister, to help his crippled 
way. Some considerating touch of humanity was in 
him ; for at times like these, he usually abstained from 
patrolling the quarter-deck ; because to his wearied 
mates, seeking repose within six inches of his ivory heel, 
such would have been the reverberating crack and din 
of that bony step, that their dreams would have been of 
the crunching teeth of sharks. But once, the mood was 
on him too deep for common regardings ; and as with 
heavy, lumber-like pace he was measuring the ship from 
tanrail to mainmast, Stubb, the odd second mate, came 
up from below, and with a certain unassured, deprecating 
humorousness, hinted that if Captain Ahab was pleased 
to walk the planks, then, no one could say nay ; but 
there might be some way of muffling the noise ; hinting 
something indistinctly and hesitatingly about a globe 
of tow, and the insertion into it, of the ivory heel. Ah ! 
Stubb, thou didst not know Ahab then. 

' Am I a cannon-ball, Stubb/ said Ahab, ' that thou 
wouldst wad me that fashion ? But go thy ways ; I had 
forgot. Below to thy nightly grave ; where such as ye 
sleep between shrouds, to use ye to the filling one at last. 
Down, dog, and kennel ! ' 



158 MOBY-DICK 

{Starting at the unforeseen concluding exclamation of 
the so suddenly scornful old man, Stubb was speechless 
a moment ; then said excitedly, ' I am not used to be 
spoken to that way, sir ; I do but less than half like it, 
sir.' 

' Avast ! ' gritted Ahab between his set teeth, and 
violently moving away, as if to avoid some passionate 
temptation. 

' No, sir ; not yet,' said Stubb, emboldened. ' I will 
not tamely be called a dog, sir.' 

' Then be called ten times a donkey, and a mule, and 
an ass, and begone, or I 11 clear the world of thee ! ' 

As he said this, Ahab advanced upon him with such 
overbearing terrors in his aspect, that Stubb involuntarily 
retreated. 

' I was never served so before without giving a hard blow 
for it,' muttered Stubb, as he found himself descending 
the cabin-scuttle. ' It 's very queer. Stop, Stubb ; 
somehow, now, I don't well know whether to go back and 
strike him, or what 's that ? down here on my knees 
and pray for him ? Yes, that was the thought coming 
up in me ; but it would be the first time I ever did pray. 
It 's queer ; very queer ; and he 's queer too ; ay, take 
him fore and aft, he 's about the queerest old man Stubb 
ever sailed with. How he flashed at me ! his eyes like 
powder-pans ! is he mad ? Anyway there 's something 
on his mind, as sure as there must be something on a deck 
when it cracks. He ain't in his bed now, either, more 
than three hours out of the twenty-four ; and he don't 
sleep then. Didn't that Dough-Boy, the steward, tell 
me that of a morning he always finds the old man's ham- 
mock clothes all rumpled and tumbled, and the sheets 
down at the foot, and the coverlid almost tied into knots, 
and the pillow a sort of frightful hot, as though a baked 
brick had been on it ? A hot old man ! I guess he 's 



ENTER AHAB 159 

got what some folks ashore call a conscience ; it 's a kind 
of Tic-Dolly-row they say worse nor a toothache. Well, 
well ; I don't know what it is, but the Lord keep me from 
catching it. He 's full of riddles ; I wonder what he goes 
into the after-hold for, every night, as Dough -Boy tells me 
he suspects ; what 's that for, I should like to know ? 
Who 's made appointments with him in the hold ? Ain't 
that queer, now ? But there 's no telling, it 's the old 
game. Here goes for a snooze. Damn me, it 's worth a 
fellow's while to be born into the world, if only to fall right 
asleep. And now that I think of it, that 's about the first 
thing babies do, and that 's a sort of queer, too. Damn 
me, but all things are queer, come to think of 'em. But 
that 's against my principles. Think not, is my eleventh, 
commandment ; and sleep when you can, is my twelfth. 
"feo here goes again. But how 's that ? didn't he call me 
a dog ? blazes ! he called me ten times a donkey, and 
piled a lot of jackasses on top of that \ He might as well 
have kicked me, and done with it. Maybe he did kick me, 
and I didn't observe it, I was so taken all aback with his 
brow, somehow. It flashed like a bleached bone. What 
the devil 's the matter with me ? I don't stand right 
on my legs. Coming afoul of that old man has a sort of 
turned me wrong side out. By the Lord, I must have 
been dreaming, though How 1 how ? how ? but the 
only way 's to stash it ; so here goes to hammock again ; 
and in the morning, I '11 see how this plaguy juggling 
thinks over by daylight.' 



CHAPTER XXX 

THE PIPE 

WHEN Stubb had departed, Ahab stood for a while leaning 
over the bulwarks ; and then, as had been usual with him 
of late, calling a sailor of the watch, he sent him below for 
his ivory stool, and also his pipe. Lighting the pipe at 
the binnacle lamp and planting the stool on the weather- 
side of the deck, he sat and smoked. 

In old Norse times, the thrones of the sea-loving Danish 
kings were fabricated, saith tradition, of the tusks of the 
narwhale. How could one look at Ahab then, seated on 
that tripod of bones, without bethinking him of the 
royalty it symbolised ? For a khan of the plank, and 
a king of the sea, and a great lord of leviathans was Ahab. 

Some moments passed, during which the thick vapour 
came from his mouth in quick and constant puffs, which 
blew back again into his face. ' How now, ' he soliloquised 
at last, withdrawing the tube, 'this smoking no longer 
soothes. Oh, my pipe ! hard must it go with me if thy 
charm be gone ! Here have I been unconsciously toiling, 
not pleasuring, ay, and ignorantly smoking to windward 
all the while ; to windward, and with such nervous whiffs, 
as if, like the dying whale, my final jets were the strongest 
and fullest of trouble. What business have I with this 
pipe ? This thing that is meant for sereneness, to send up 
mild white vapours among mild white hairs, not among 
torn iron -gray locks like mine. I '11 smoke no more 

He tossed the still lighted pipe into the sea. The fire 
hissed in the waves ; the same instant the ship shot by 
the bubble the sinking pipe made. With slouched hat, 
Ahab lurchingly paced the planks. 

160 



CHAPTER XXXI 

QUEEN MAB 

NEXT morning Stubb accosted Flask. 

' Such a queer dream, King-Post, I never had. You 
know the old man's ivory leg, well I dreamed he kicked 
me with it ; and when I tried to kick back, upon my soul, 
my little man, I kicked my leg right off ! And then, 
presto ! Ahab seemed a pyramid, and I, like a blazing 
fool, kept kicking at it. But what was still more curious, 
Flask you know how curious all dreams are through 
all this rage that I was in, I somehow seemed to be think- 
ing to myself, that after all, it was not much of an insult, 
that kick from Ahab. " Why," thinks I, " what 's the 
row ? It 's not a real leg, only a false leg." And there 's 
a mighty difference between a living thump and a dead 
thump. That 's what makes a blow from the hand, 
Flask, fifty times more savage to bear than a blow from 
a cane. The living member that makes the living insult, 
my little man. And thinks I to myself afl the wnile, 
mind, while I was stubbing my silly toes against that 
cursed pyramid so confoundedly contradictory was it 
all, all the while, I say, I was thinking to myself, "What 's 
his leg now, but a cane a whalebone cane. Yes," 
thinks I, "it was only a playful cudgelling in fact, only 
a whaleboning that he gave me not a base kick. Be- 
sides," thinks I, " look at it once ; why, the end of it 
the foot part what a small sort of end it is ; whereas, if 
a broad-footed farmer kicked me, there 's a devilish broad 
insult. But this insult is whittled down to a point only." 

VOL. I. L 



162 MOBY-DICK 

But now comes the greatest joke of the dream, Flask. 
While I was battering away at the pyramid, a sort of 
badger-haired old merman, with a hump on his back, 
takes me by the shoulders, and slews me round. " What 
are you 'bout ? " says he. Slid ! man, but I was 
frightened. Such a phiz ! But, somehow, next moment 
I was over the fright. " What am I about ? " says I at 
last. " And what business is that of yours, I should like 
to know, Mr. Humpback ? Do you want a kick ? " By 
the lord, Flask, I had no sooner said that, than he turned 
round his stern to me, bent over, and dragging up a lot 
of seaweed he had for a clout what do you think I saw ? 
why, thunder alive, man, his stern was stuck full of 
marling-spikes, with the points out. Says I, on second 
thoughts, " I guess I won't kick you, old fellow." " Wise 
Stubb," said he, " wise Stubb " ; and kept muttering 
it all the time, a sort of eating of his own gums like a 
chimney hag. Seeing he wasn't going to stop saying 
over his " wise Stubb, wise Stubb," I thought I might as 
well fall to kicking the pyramid again. But I had only 
just lifted my foot for it, when he roared out, " Stop that 
kicking ! " " Halloa," says I, " what 's the matter now, 
old fellow ? " " Look ye here," says he ; " let 's argue 
the insult. Captain Ahab kicked ye, didn't he ? " " Yes, 
he did," says I "right here it was." "Very good," 
says he " he used his ivory leg, didn't he ? " " Yes, he 
did," says I. " WeU, then," says he, " wise Stubb, what 
have you to complain of ? Didn't he kick with right 
goodwill ? it wasn't a common pitch-pine leg he kicked 
with, was it ? No, you were kicked by a great man, and 
with a beautiful ivory leg, Stubb. It 's an honour ; I 
consider it an honour. Listen, wise Stubb. In old 
England the greatest lords think it great glory to be 
slapped by a queen, and made garter-knights of ; but, 
be your boast, Stubb, that ye were kicked by old Ahab, 



QUEEN MAB 163 

and made a wise man of. Remember what I say ; be 
kicked by him ; account his kicks honours ; and on no 
account kick back ; for you can't help yourself, wise 
Stubb. Don't you see that pyramid ? " With that, he 
all of a sudden seemed somehow, in some queer fashion, 
to swim off into the air. I snored ; rolled over ; and there 
I was in my hammock ! Now, what do you think of that 
dream, Flask ? ' 

4 1 don't know ; it seems a sort of foolish to me, 
though.' 

4 Maybe ; maybe. But it 's made a wise man of me, 
Flask. D' ye see Ahab standing there, sideways looking 
over the stern ? Well, the best thing you can do, Flask, 
is to let that old man alone ; never speak to him, whatever 
he says. Halloa ! What 's that he shouts ? Hark ! ' 

' Mast-head, there ! Look sharp, all of ye ! There are 
whales hereabouts ! If ye see a white one, split your 
lungs for him ! ' 

' What do you think of that now, Flask ? ain't there a 
small drop of something queer about that, eh ? A white 
whale did ye mark that, man ? Look ye there 's 
something special in the wind. Stand by for it, Flask. 
Ahab has that that 's bloody on his mind. But, mum ; 
he comes this way.' 




CHAPTER XXXII 

CETOLOGY 

ALREADY we are boldly launched upon the deep ; but 
soon we shall be lost in its unshored, harbourless immen- 
sities. Ere that come to pass ; ere the Pequod'a weedy 
hull rolls side by side with the barnacled hulls of the 
leviathan ; at the outset it is but well to attend to a 
matter almost indispensable to a thorough appreciative 
understanding of the more special leviathanic revelations 
and allusions of all sorts which are to follow. 

It is some systematised exhibition of the whale in his 
broad genera, that I would now fain put before you. Yet 
is it no easy task. The classification of the constituents 
of a chaos, nothing less is here essayed. Listen to what 
the best and latest authorities have laid down. 

' No branch of Zoology is so much involved as that which 
is entitled Cetology,' says Captain Scoresby, A.D. 1820. 

' It is not my intention, were it in my power, to enter 
into the inquiry as to the true method of dividing the 
cetacea into groups and families. * * * Utter confusion 
exists among the historians of this animal ' (Sperm 
whale), says Surgeon Beale, A.D. 1839. 

' Unfitness to pursue our research in the unfathomable 
waters.' ' Impenetrable veil covering our knowledge of 
the cetacea.' ' A field strewn with thorns.' ' All these 
incomplete indications but serve to torture us naturalists.' 

Thus speak of the whale, the great Cuvier, and John 
Hunter, and Lesson, those lights of zoology and anatomy. 
Nevertheless, though of real knowledge there be little, 

164 



CETOLOGY 165 

yet of books there are a plenty ; and so in some small 
degree, with Cetology, or the science of whales. Many are 
the men, small and great, old and new, landsmen and sea- 
men, who have at large or in little, written of the whale. 
Run over a few : The Authors of the Bible ; Aristotle ; 
Pliny ; Aldrovandi ; Sir Thomas Browne ; Gesner ; 
Ray ; Linnaeus ; Rondeletius ; Willoughby ; Green ; 
Artedi ; Sibbald ; Brisson ; Marten ; Lacepede ; Bonne- 
terre ; Desmarest ; Baron Cuvier ; Frederick Cuvier ; 
John Hunter ; Owen ; Scoresby ; Beale ; Bennett ; J. 
Ross Browne ; the Author of Miriam Coffin ; Olmstead ; 
and the Rev. T. Cheever. But to what ultimate general- 
ising purpose all these have written, the above-cited 
extracts will show. 

Of the names in this list of whale authors, only those 
following Owen ever saw living whales ; and but one of 
them was a real professional harpooneer and whaleman. 
I mean Captain Scoresby. On the separate subject of 
the Greenland or Right whale, he is the best existing 
authority. But Scoresby knew nothing and says nothing 
of the great Sperm whale, compared with which the Green- 
land whale is almost unworthy mentioning. And here 
be it said, that the Greenland whale is an usurper upon 
the throne of the seas. He is not even by any means the 
largest of the whales. Yet, owing to the long priority 
of his claims, and the profound ignorance which, till some 
seventy years back, invested the then fabulous or utterly 
unknown Sperm whale, and which ignorance to this 
present day still reigns in all but some few scientific 
retreats and whale -ports ; this usurpation has been every 
way complete. Reference to nearly all the leviathanic 
allusions in the great poets of past days, will satisfy you 
that the Greenland whale, without one rival, was to them 
the monarch of the seas. But the time has at last come 
for a new proclamation. This is Charing Cross ; hear ye ! 



166 MOBY-DICK 

good people all, the Greenland whale is deposed, the 
great Sperm whale now reigneth ! 

There are only two books in being which at all pretend 
to put the living Sperm whale before you, and at the same 
time, in the remotest degree succeed in the attempt. 
Those books are Beale's and Bennett's ; both in their 
time surgeons to the English South -Sea whale -ships, and 
both exact and reliable men. The original matter 
touching the Sperm whale to be found in their volumes is 
necessarily small ; but so far as it goes, it is of excellent 
quality, though mostly confined to scientific description. 
As yet, however, the Sperm whale, scientific or poetic, 
lives not complete in any literature. Far above all other 
hunted whales, his is an unwritten life. 

Now the various species of whales need some sort of 
popular comprehensive classification, if only an easy 
outline one for the present, hereafter to be filled in all its 
departments by subsequent labourers. As no better 
man advances to take this matter in hand, I hereupon 
offer my own poor endeavours. I promise nothing 
complete ; because any human thing supposed to be 
complete, must for that very reason infallibly be faulty. 
I shall not pretend to a minute anatomical description of 
the various species, or in this place at least to much of 
any description. My object here is simply to project the 
draught of a systematisation of Cetology. I am the 
architect, not the builder. 

But it is a ponderous task ; no ordinary letter-sorter 
in the Post Office is equal to it. To grope down into the 
bottom of the sea after them ; to have one's hands 
among the unspeakable foundations, ribs, and very pelvis 
of the world ; this is a fearful thing. What am I that I 
should essay to hook the nose of this leviathan ! The 
awful tauntings in Job might well appal me. ' Will he 
(the leviathan) make a covenant with thee ? Behold the 



CETOLOGY 167 

hope of him is vain ! ' But I have swam through libraries 
and sailed through oceans ; I have had to do with whales 
with these visible hands ; I am in earnest ; and I will 
try. There are some preliminaries to settle. 

First : The uncertain, unsettled condition of this 
science of Cetology is in the very vestibule attested by 
the fact, that in some quarters it still remains a moot point 
whether a whale be a fish. In his System of Nature, 
A.D. 1776, Linnaeus declares, ' I hereby separate the whales 
from the fish. 5 But of my own knowledge, I know that 
down to the year 1850, sharks and shad, ale wives and 
herring, against Linnaeus 's express edict, were still found 
dividing the possession of the same seas with the leviathan. 

The grounds upon which Linnaeus would fain have 
banished the whales from the waters, he states as follows : 
' On account of their warm bilocular heart, their lungs, 
their movable eyelids, their hollow ears, penem intrantem 
feminam mammis lactantem,' and finally, ' ex lege naturae 
jure meritoque.' I submitted all this to my friends 
Simeon Macey and Charley Coffin, of Nantucket, both 
messmates of mine in a certain voyage, and they united 
in the opinion that the reasons set forth were altogether 
insufficient . Charley profanely hinted they were humbug . 

Be it known that, waiving all argument, I take the good 
old-fashioned ground that the whale is a fish, and call 
upon holy Jonah to back me. This fundamental thing 
settled, the next point is, in what internal respect does 
the whale differ from other fish. Above, Linnaeus has 
given you those items. But in brief, they are those : 
lungs and warm blood ; whereas, all other fish are lung- 
less and cold-blooded. 

Next : how shall we define the whale, by his obvious 
externals, so as conspicuously to label him for all time to 
come ? To be short, then, a whale is a spouting fish with 
a horizontal tail. There you have him. However con- 



168 MOBY-DICK 

traded, that definition is the result of expanded medita- 
tion. A walrus spouts much like a whale, but the walrus 
is not a fish, because he is amphibious. But the last term 
of the definition is still more cogent, as coupled with the 
first. Almost any one must have noticed that all the 
fish familiar to landsmen have not a flat, but a vertical, 
or up-and-down tail. Whereas, among spouting fish the 
tail, though it may be similarly shaped, invariably assumes 
a horizontal position. 

By the above definition of what a whale is, I do by no 
means exclude from the leviathanic brotherhood any sea- 
creature hitherto identified with the whale by the best- 
informed Nantucketers ; nor, on the other hand, link 
with it any fish hitherto authoritatively regarded as alien. 1 
Hence, all the smaller, spouting, and horizontal-tailed fish 
must be included in this ground-plan of Cetology. Now, 
then, come the grand divisions of the entire whale host. 

First : According to magnitude I divide the whales into 
three primary BOOKS (subdivisible into CHAPTERS), and 
these shall comprehend them all, both small and large. 

I. The FOLIO WHALE ; II. the OCTAVO WHALE ; 
III. the DUODECIMO WHALE. 

As the type of the FOLIO I present the Sperm Whale ; 
of the OCTAVO, the Grampus ; of the DUODECIMO, the 
Porpoise. 

FOLIOS. Among these I here include the following 
chapters : I. the Sperm Whale ; II. the Right Whale ; 
III. the Fin-lack Whale ; IV. the Hump-backed Whale \ 
V. the Razor-back Whale ; VI. the Sulphur-bottom Whale. 

BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER I. (Sperm Whale). This 

1 I am aware that down to the present time, the fish styled Lamatins 
and Dugongs (Pig-fish and Sow-fish of the Coffins of Nantucket) are 
included by many naturalists among the whales. But as these pig-fish 
are a nosy, contemptible set, mostly lurking in the mouths of rivers, and 
feeding on wet hay, and especially as they do not spout, I deny their 
credentials as whales ; and have presented them with their passports to 
quit the Kingdom of Cetology. 



CETOLOGY 169 

whale, among the English of old vaguely known as the 
Trumpa whale, and the Physeter whale, and the Anvil- 
headed whale, is the present Cachalot of the French, and 
the Pottsfisch of the Germans, and the Macrocephalus 
of the Long Words. He is, without doubt, the largest 
inhabitant of the globe ; the most formidable of all 
whales to encounter ; the most majestic in aspect ; and 
lastly, by far the most valuable in commerce ; he being 
the only creature from which that valuable substance, 
spermaceti, is obtained. All his peculiarities will, in 
many other places, be enlarged upon. It is chiefly with 
his name that I now have to do. Philologically con- 
sidered, it is absurd. Some centuries ago, when the 
Sperm whale was almost wholly unknown in his own 
proper individuality, and when his oil was only accident- 
ally obtained from the stranded fish ; in those days 
spermaceti, it would seem, was popularly supposed to be 
derived from a creature identical with the one then known 
in England as the Greenland or Right whale. It was 
the idea also, that this same spermaceti was that quicken- 
ing humour of the Greenland whale which the first 
syllable of the word literally expresses. In those times, 
also, spermaceti was exceedingly scarce, not being used 
for light, but only as an ointment and medicament. It 
was only to be had from the druggists as you nowadays 
buy an ounce of rhubarb. When, as I opine, in the course 
of time, the true nature of spermaceti became known, its 
original name was still retained by the dealers ; no doubt 
to enhance its value by a notion so strangely significant 
of its scarcity. And so the appellation must at last have 
come to be bestowed upon the whale from which this 
spermaceti was really derived. 

BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER II. (Right Whale). In one 
respect this is the most venerable of the leviathans, being 
the one first regularly hunted by man. It yields the 



170 MOBY-DICK 

article commonly known as whalebone or baleen ; and 
the oil specially known as ' whale oil,' an inferior article 
in commerce. Among the fishermen, he is indiscrimin- 
ately designated by all the following titles : The Whale ; 
the Greenland Whale ; the Black Whale ; the Great 
Whale ; the True Whale ; the Right Whale. There is a 
deal of obscurity concerning the identity of the species 
thus multitudinously baptized. What then is the whale, 
which I include in the second species of my Folios ? It is 
the Great Mysticetus of the English naturalists ; the 
Greenland Whale of the English whalemen ; the Baleine 
Ordinaire of the French whalemen ; the Growlands Wal- 
fisch of the Swedes. It is the whale which for more than 
two centuries past has been hunted by the Dutch and 
English in the Arctic seas ; it is the whale which the 
American fishermen have long pursued in the Indian 
Ocean, on the Brazil Banks, on the Nor '-West Coast, and 
various other parts of the world, designated by them 
Right Whale Cruising-Grounds. 

Some pretend to see a difference between the Greenland 
whale of the English and the Right whale of the Ameri- 
cans. But they precisely agree in all their grand features ; 
nor has there yet been presented a single determinate 
fact upon which to ground a radical distinction. It is 
by endless subdivisions based upon the most inconclusive 
differences, that some departments of natural history 
become so repellingly intricate. The Right whale will 
be elsewhere treated of at some length, with reference to 
elucidating the Sperm whale. 

BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER III. (Fin-back). Under 
this head I reckon a monster which, by the various names 
of Fin-back, Tall-spout, and Long-John, has been seen 
almost in every sea and is commonly the whale whose 
distant jet is so often descried by passengers crossing the 
Atlantic, in the New York packet -tracks. In the length 



CETOLOGY 171 

he attains, and in his baleen, the Fin-back resembles the 
Right whale, but is of a less portly girth, and a lighter 
colour, approaching to olive. His great lips present a 
cable-like aspect, formed by the intertwisting, slanting 
folds of large wrinkles. His grand distinguishing feature, 
the fin, from which he derives his name, is often a con- 
spicuous object. This fin is some three or four feet long, 
growing vertically from the hinder part of the back, of 
an angular shape, and with a very sharp-pointed end. 
Even if not the slightest other part of the creature be 
visible, this isolated fin will, at times, be seen plainly 
projecting from the surface. When the sea is moderately 
calm, and slightly marked with spherical ripples, and this 
gnomon-like fin stands up and casts shadows upon the 
wrinkled surface, it may well be supposed that the watery 
circle surrounding it somewhat resembles a dial, with its 
style and wavy hour-lines graved on it. On that Ahaz- 
dial the shadow often goes back. The Fin-back is not 
gregarious. He seems a whale-hater, as some men are 
man-haters. Very shy ; always going solitary ; unex- 
pectedly rising to the surface in the remotest and most 
sullen waters ; his straight and single lofty jet rising like 
a tall misanthropic spear upon a barren plain ; gifted with 
such wondrous power and velocity in swimming, as to 
defy all present pursuit from man ; this leviathan seems 
the banished and unconquerable Cain of his race, bearing 
for his mark that style upon his back. From having the 
baleen in his mouth, the Fin-back is sometimes included 
with the Right whale, among a theoretic species denomin- 
ated Whalebone whales, that is, whales with baleen. Of 
these so-called Whalebone whales, there would seem to be 
several varieties, most of which, however, are little known. 
Broad-nosed whales and Beaked whales ; Pike -headed 
whales ; Bunched whales ; Under- jawed whales and 
Rostrated whales, are the fishermen's names for a few sorts. 



172 MOBY-DICK 

In connection with this appellative of ' Whalebone 
whales/ it is of great importance to mention, that how- 
ever such a nomenclature may be convenient in facilitat- 
ing allusions to some kind of whales, yet it is in vain to 
attempt a clear classification of the leviathan, founded 
upon either his baleen, or hump, or fin, or teeth ; not- 
withstanding that those marked parts or features very 
obviously seem better adapted to afford the basis for a 
regular system of Cetology than any other detached 
bodily distinctions, which the whale, in his kinds, presents. 
How then ? The baleen, hump, back-fin, and teeth ; 
these are things whose peculiarities are indiscriminately 
dispersed among all sorts of whales, without any regard 
to what may be the nature of their structure in other and 
more essential particulars. Thus, the Sperm whale and 
the Hump-backed whale, each has a hump ; but there 
the similitude ceases. Then, this same Hump-backed 
whale and the Greenland whale, each of these has baleen ; 
but there again the similitude ceases. And it is just the 
same with the other parts above mentioned. In various 
sorts of whales, they form such irregular combinations ; 
or, in the case of any one of them detached, such an 
irregular isolation ; as utterly to defy all general methodis- 
ation formed upon such a basis. On this rock every one 
of the whale -naturalists has split. 

But it may possibly be conceived that, in the internal 
parts of the whale, in his anatomy there, at least, we 
shall be able to hit the right classification. Nay : what 
thing, for example, is there in the Greenland whale's 
anatomy more striking than his baleen ? Yet we have 
seen that by his baleen it is impossible correctly to classify 
the Greenland whale. And if you descend into the bowels 
of the various leviathans, why there you will not find 
distinctions a fiftieth part as available to the systematiser 
as those external ones already enumerated. What then 



CETOLOGY 173 

remains ? nothing but to take hold of the whales bodily, 
in their entire liberal volume, and boldly sort them that 
way. And this is the Bibliographical system here adopted ; 
and it is the only one that can possibly succeed, for it 
alone is practicable. To proceed. 

BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER IV. (Hump-back). This 
whale is often seen on the northern American coast. He 
has been frequently captured there, and towed into 
harbour. He has a great pack on him like a peddler ; or 
you might call him the Elephant and Castle whale. At 
any rate, the popular name for him does not sufficiently 
distinguish him, since the Sperm whale also has a hump, 
though a smaller one. His oil is not very valuable. He 
has baleen. He is the most gamesome and light-hearted 
of all the whales, making more gay foam and white water 
generally than any other of them. 

BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER V. (Razor-back). Of this 
whale little is known but his name. I have seen him at a 
distance off Cape Horn. Of a retiring nature, he eludes 
both hunters and philosophers. Though no coward, he 
has never yet shown any part of him but his back, which 
rises in a long sharp ridge. Let him go. I know little 
more of him, nor does anybody else. 

BOOK I. (Folio), CHAPTER VI. (Sulphur-bottom). 
Another retiring gentleman, with a brimstone belly, 
doubtless got by scraping along the Tartarian tiles in 
some of his profounder divings. He is seldom seen ; at 
least I have never seen him except in the remoter Southern 
seas, and then always at too great a distance to study his 
countenance. He is never chased ; he would run away 
with rope -walks of line. Prodigies are told of him. 
Adieu, Sulphur-bottom ! I can say nothing more that is 
true of ye, nor can the oldest Nantucketer. 

Thus ends BOOK I. (Folio), and now begins BOOK II, 
(Octavo). 



174 MOBY-DICK 

OCTAVOS. 1 These embrace the whales of middling 
magnitude, among which at present may be numbered : 
I. the Grampus ; II. the Black Fish ; III. the Narwhale ; 
IV. the Killer ; V. the Thrasher. 

BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER I. (Grampus). Though 
this fish, whose loud sonorous breathing, or rather blowing, 
has furnished a proverb to landsmen, is so well known 
a denizen of the deep, yet is he not popularly classed 
among whales. But possessing all the grand distinctive 
features of the leviathan, most naturalists have recog- 
nised him for one. He is of moderate octavo size, varying 
from fifteen to twenty-five feet in length, and of corre- 
sponding dimensions round the waist. He swims in 
herds ; he is never regularly hunted, though his oil is 
considerable in quantity, and pretty good for light. By 
some fishermen his approach is regarded as premonitory 
of the advance of the great Sperm whale. 

BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER II. (Black Fish). I give 
the popular fishermen's names for all these fish, for gener- 
ally they are the best. Where any name happens to be 
vague or inexpressive, I shall say so, and suggest another. 
I do so now, touching the Black Fish, so called, because 
blackness is the rule among almost all whales. So, call 
him the Hyena whale, if you please. His voracity is well 
known, and from the circumstance that the inner angles 
of his lips are curved upward, he carries an everlasting 
Mephistophelean grin on his face. This whale averages 
some sixteen or eighteen feet in length. He is found in 
almost all latitudes. He has a peculiar way of showing 
his dorsal hooked fin in swimming, which looks something 
like a Roman nose. When not more profitably employed, 

1 Why this book of whales is not denominated the Quarto is very plain. 
Because, while the whales of this order, though smaller than those of the 
former order, nevertheless retain a proportionate likeness to them in figure, 
yet the bookbinder's Quarto volume in its diminished form does not 
preserve the shape of the Folio volume, but the Octavo volume does. 



CETOLOGY 175 

the Sperm-whale hunters sometimes capture the Hyena 
whale, to keep up the supply of cheap oil for domestic 
employment as some frugal housekeepers, in the absence 
of company, and quite alone by themselves, burn un- 
savoury tallow instead of odorous wax. Though their 
blubber is very thin, some of these whales will yield you 
upward of thirty gallons of oil. 

BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER III. (Narwhale), that is, 
Nostril Whale. Another instance of a curiously named 
whale, so named I suppose from his peculiar horn being 
originally mistaken for a peaked nose. The creature is 
some sixteen feet in length, while its horn averages five 
feet, though some exceed ten, and even attain to fifteen 
feet. Strictly speaking, this horn is but a lengthened 
tusk, growing out from the jaw in a line a little depressed 
from the horizontal. But it is only found on the sinister 
side, which has an ill effect, giving its owner something 
analogous to the aspect of a clumsy left-handed man. 
What precise purpose this ivory horn or lance answers, it 
would be hard to say. It does not seem to be used like 
the blade of the sword-fish and bill-fish ; though some 
sailors tell me that the Narwhale employs it for a rake 
in turning over the bottom of the sea for food. Charley 
Coffin said it was used for an ice-piercer ; for the Nar- 
whale, rising to the surface of the Polar Sea, and finding 
it sheeted with ice, thrusts his horn up, and so breaks 
through. But you cannot prove either of these surmises 
to be correct. My own opinion is, that however this one- 
sided horn may really be used by the Narwhale however 
that may be it would certainly be very convenient to 
him for a folder in reading pamphlets. The Narwhale 
I have heard called the Tusked whale, the Horned whale, 
and the Unicorn whale. He is certainly a curious 
example of the Unicornism to be found in almost every 
kingdom of animated nature. From certain cloistered 



176 MOBY-DICK 

old authors I have gathered that this same sea-unicorn's 
horn was in ancient days regarded as the great antidote 
against poison, and as such, preparations of it brought 
immense prices. It was also distilled to a volatile salts 
for fainting ladies, the same way that the horns of the 
male deer are manufactured into hartshorn. Originally 
it was in itself accounted an object of great curiosity. 
Black Letter tells me that Sir Martin Frobisher on his 
return from that voyage, when Queen Bess did gallantly 
wave her jewelled hand to him from a window of Green- 
wich Palace, as his bold ship sailed down the Thames ; 
' when Sir Martin returned from that voyage,' saith Black 
Letter, ' on bended knees he presented to her highness 
a prodigious long horn of the Narwhale, which for a long 
period after hung in the castle at Windsor.' An Irish 
author avers that the Earl of Leicester, on bended knees, 
did likewise present to her highness another horn, per- 
taining to a land-beast of the unicorn nature. 

The Narwhale has a very picturesque, leopard-like look, 
being of a milk-white ground colour, dotted with round 
and oblong spots of black. His oil is very superior, clear 
and fine ; but there is little of it, and he is seldom hunted. 
He is mostly found in the circumpolar seas. 

BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER IV. (Killer). Of this 
whale little is precisely known to the Nantucketer, and 
nothing at all to the professed naturalist. From what I 
have seen of him at a distance, I should say that he was 
about the bigness of a grampus. He is very savage a 
sort of Feegee fish. He sometimes takes the great Folio 
whale by the lip, and hangs there like a leech, till the 
mighty brute is worried to death. The Killer is never 
hunted. I never heard what sort of oil he has. Excep- 
tion might be taken to the name bestowed upon this whale, 
on the ground of its indistinctness. For we are all killers, 
on land and on sea ; Bonapartes and Sharks included. 



CETOLOGY 177 

BOOK II. (Octavo), CHAPTER V. (Thrasher). This 
gentleman is famous for his tail, which he uses for a 
ferule in thrashing his foes. He mounts the Folio 
whale's back, and as he swims, he works his passage by 
flogging him ; as some schoolmasters get along in the 
world by a similar process. Still less is known of the 
Thrasher than of the Killer. Both are outlaws, even in 
the lawless seas. 

Thus ends BOOK II. (Octavo), and begins BOOK III. 
(Duodecimo). 

DUODECIMOS. These include the smaller whales: 
I. the Huzza Porpoise ; II. the Algerine Porpoise ; III. 
the Mealy-mouthed Porpoise. 

To those who have not chanced specially to study the 
subject, it may possibly seem strange, that fishes not 
commonly exceeding four or five feet should be marshalled 
among WHALES a word which, in the popular sense, 
always conveys an idea of hugeness. But the creatures 
set down above as Duodecimos are infallibly whales, by 
the terms of my definition of what a whale is i.e. a 
spouting fish, with a horizontal tail. 

BOOK III. (Duodecimo), CHAPTER I. (Huzza Porpoise). 
This is the common porpoise found almost all over the 
globe. The name is of my own bestowal ; for there are 
more than one sort of porpoises, and something must be 
done to distinguish them. I call him thus, because he 
always swims in hilarious shoals, which upon the broad 
sea keep tossing themselves to heaven like caps in a 
Fourth-of-July crowd. Their appearance is generally 
hailed with delight by the mariner. Full of fine spirits, 
they invariably come from the breezy billows to windward. 
They are the lads that always live before the wind. They 
are accounted a lucky omen. If you yourself can with- 
stand three cheers at beholding these vivacious fish, then 
heaven help ye ; the spirit of godly gamesomeness is not 

VOL. I. M 



178 MOBY-DICK 

in ye. A well-fed, plump Huzza porpoise will yield you 
one good gallon of good oil. But the fine and delicate 
fluid extracted from his jaws is exceedingly valuable. 
It is in request among jewellers and watchmakers. Sailors 
put it on their hones. Porpoise meat is good eating, you 
know. It may never have occurred to you that a por- 
poise spouts. Indeed, his spout is so small that it is not 
very readily discernible. But the next time you have a 
chance, watch him ; and you will then see the great 
Sperm whale himself in miniature. 

BOOK III. (Duodecimo), CHAPTER II. (Algerine Por- 
poise). A pirate. Very savage. He is only found, I 
think, in the Pacific. He is somewhat larger than the 
Huzza porpoise, but much of the same general make. 
Provoke him, and he will buckle to a shark. I have 
lowered for him many times, but never yet saw him 
captured. 

BOOK III. (Duodecimo), CHAPTER III. (Mealy-mouthed 
Porpoise). The largest kind of porpoise ; and only 
found in the Pacific, so far as it is known. The only 
English name, by which he has hitherto been designated, 
,is that of the fishers Right-whale porpoise, from the 
circumstance that he is chiefly found in the vicinity of 
that Folio. In shape, he differs in some degree from the 
Huzza porpoise, being of a less rotund and jolly girth ; 
indeed, he is of quite a neat and gentleman -like figure. 
He has no fins on his back (most other porpoises have), 
he has a lovely tail, and sentimental Indian eyes of a 
hazel hue. But his mealy-mouth spoils all. Though 
his entire back down to his side fins is of a deep sable, 
yet a boundary line, distinct as the mark in a ship's 
hull, called the ' bright waist/ that line streaks him from 
stem to stern, with two separate colours, black above and 
white below. The white comprises part of his head, and 
the whole of his mouth, which makes him look as if he 
had just escaped from a felonious visit to a meal -bag. 



CETOLOGY 179 

A most mean and mealy aspect ! His oil is much like 

that of the common porpoise. 

******* 

Beyond the DUODECIMO, this system does not proceed, 
inasmuch as the porpoise is the smallest of the whales. 
Above, you have all the leviathans of note. But there 
are a rabble of uncertain, fugitive, half-fabulous whales, 
which, as an American whaleman, I know by reputation, 
but not personally. I shall enumerate them by their 
forecastle appellations ; for possibly such a list may be 
valuable to future investigators, who may complete what 
I have here but begun. If any of the following whales 
shall hereafter be caught and marked, then he can readily 
be incorporated into this system, according to his Folio, 
Octavo, or Duodecimo magnitude : The Bottle-nose 
Whale ; the Junk Whale ; the Pudding-headed Whale ; 
the Cape Whale ; the Leading Whale ; the Cannon 
Whale ; the Scragg Whale ; the Coppered Whale ; the 
Elephant Whale ; the Iceberg Whale ; the Quog Whale ; 
the Blue Whale, etc. From Icelandic, Dutch, and old 
English authorities, there might be quoted other lists of 
uncertain whales, blessed with all manner of uncouth 
names. But I omit them as altogether obsolete ; and 
can hardly help suspecting them for mere sounds, full of 
leviathanism, but signifying nothing. 

Finally : It was stated at the outset, that this system 
would not be here, and at once, perfected. You cannot 
but plainly see that I have kept my word. But I now 
leave my cetological system standing thus unfinished, even 
as the great Cathedral of Cologne was left, with the crane 
still standing upon the top of the uncompleted tower. 
For small erections may be finished by their first archi- 
tects ; grand ones, true ones, ever leave the cope-stone to 
posterity. God keep me from ever completing anything. 
This whole book is but a draught nay, but the draught 
of a draught. Oh, Time, Strength, Cash, and Patience ! 



CHAPTER XXXIII 

THE SPECKSYNDER 

CONCERNING the officers of the whale-craft, this seems 
as good a place as any to set down a little domestic 
peculiarity on shipboard, arising from the existence of 
the harpooneer class of officers, a class unknown of course 
in any other marine than the whale-fleet. 

The large importance attached to the harpooneer J s 
vocation is evinced by the fact, that originally in the old 
Dutch Fishery, two centuries and more ago, the command 
of a whale -ship was not wholly lodged in the person now 
called the captain, but was divided between him and an 
officer called the Specksynder. Literally this word 
means Fat -Cutter ; usage, however, in time made it 
equivalent to Chief Harpooneer. In those days, the 
captain's authority was restricted to the navigation and 
general management of the vessel : while over the whale- 
hunting department and all its concerns, the Specksynder 
or Chief Harpooneer reigned supreme. In the British 
Greenland Fishery, under the corrupted title of Speck- 
sioneer, this old Dutch official is still retained, but his 
former dignity is sadly abridged. At present he ranks 
simply as senior Harpooneer ; and as such, is but one of 
the captain's more inferior subalterns. Nevertheless, as 
upon the good conduct of the harpooneers the success of 
a whaling voyage largely depends, and since in the Ameri- 
can Fishery he is not only an important officer in the boat, 
but under certain circumstances (night-watches on a 
whaling -ground) the command of the ship's deck is also 

180 



THE SPECKSYNDER 181 

his ; therefore the grand political maxim of the sea 
demands, that he should nominally live apart from the 
men before the mast, and be in some way distinguished 
as their professional superior ; though always, by them, 
familiarly regarded as their social equal. 

Now, the grand distinction drawn between officer and 
man at sea is this the first lives aft, the last forward. 
Hence, in whale-ships and merchantmen alike, the mates 
have their quarters with the captain ; and so, too, in 
most of the American whalers the harpooneers are lodged 
in the after part of the ship. That is to say, they take 
their meals in the captain's cabin, and sleep in a place 
indirectly communicating with it. 

Though the long period of a Southern whaling voyage 
(by far the longest of all voyages now or ever made by 
man), the peculiar perils of it, and the community of 
interest prevailing among a company, all of whom, high 
or low, depend for their profits, not upon fixed wages, 
but upon their common luck, together with their common 
vigilance, intrepidity, and hard work ; though all these 
things do in some cases tend to beget a less rigorous 
discipline than in merchantmen generally ; yet, never 
mind how much like an old Mesopotamian family these 
whalemen may, in some primitive instances, live together ; 
for all that, the punctilious externals, at least, of the 
quarter-deck are seldom materially relaxed, and in no 
instance done away. Indeed, many are the Nantucket 
ships in which you will see the skipper parading his 
quarter-deck with an elated grandeur not surpassed in 
any military navy ; nay, extorting almost as much out- 
ward homage as if he wore the imperial purple, and not 
the shabbiest of pilot-cloth. 

And though of all men the moody captain of the Pequod 
was the least given to that sort of shallowest assumption ; 
and though the only homage he ever exacted was im- 



182 MOBY-DICK 

plicit, instantaneous obedience ; though he required no 
man to remove the shoes from his feet ere stepping upon 
the quarter-deck ; and though there were times when, 
owing to peculiar circumstances connected with events 
hereafter to be detailed, he addressed them in unusual 
terms, whether of condescension or in terrorem, or other- 
wise ; yet even Captain Ahab was by no means unob- 
servant of the paramount forms and usages of the sea. 

Nor, perhaps, will it fail to be eventually perceived, that 
behind those forms and usages, as it were, he sometimes 
masked himself ; incidentally making use of them for 
other and more private ends than they were legitimately 
intended to subserve. That certain sultanism of his 
brain, which had otherwise in a good degree remained 
unmanifested ; through those forms that same sultanism 
/became incarnate in an irresistible dictatorship. For be a 
man's intellectual superiority what it will, it can never 
assume the practical, available supremacy over other men, 
without the aid of some sort of external arts and entrench- 
ments, always, in themselves, more or less paltry and base. 
This it is, that forever keeps God's true princes of the 
Empire from the world's hustings ; and leaves the highest 
honours that this air can give, to those men who become 
famous more through their infinite inferiority to the choice 
hidden handful of the Divine Inert, than through their 
undoubted superiority over the dead level of the mass. 
Such large virtue lurks in these small things when extreme 
political superstitions invest them, that in some royal 
instances even to idiot imbecility they have imparted 
potency. But when, as in the case of Nicholas the Czar, 
the ringed crown of geographical empire encircles an 
imperial brain ; then, the plebeian herds crouch abased 
before the tremendous centralisation. Nor will the 
tragic dramatist who would depict mortal indomitable - 
ness in its fullest sweep and direct swing, ever forget a 



THE SPECKS YNDER 183 

hint, incidentally so important in his art, as the one now 
alluded to. 

But Ahab, my captain, still moves before me in all 
his Nantucket grimness and shagginess ; and in this 
episode touching emperors and kings, I must not conceal 
that I have only to do with a poor old whale-hunter like 
him ; and, therefore, all outward majestical trappings 
and housings are denied me. Oh, Ahab ! what shall be 
grand in thee, it must needs be plucked at from the skies, 
and dived for in the deep, and featured in the unbodied 
air ! 



CHAPTER XXXIV 

THE CABIN-TABLE 

IT is noon ; and Dough-Boy, the steward, thrusting his 
pale loaf-of-bread face from the cabin-scuttle, announces 
dinner to his lord and master ; who, sitting in the lee 
quarter-boat, has just been taking an observation of the 
sun ; and is now mutely reckoning the latitude on the 
smooth, medallion-shaped tablet, reserved for that daily 
purpose on the upper part of his ivory leg. From his 
complete inattention to the tidings, you would think that 
moody Ahab had not heard his menial. But presently, 
catching hold of the mizen shrouds, he swings himself 
to the deck, and in an even, unexhilarated voice, saying, 
'Dinner, Mr. Starbuck,' disappears into the .cabin. 

When the last echo of his sultan's step has died away, 
and Starbuck, the first Emir, has every reason to suppose 
that he is seated, then Starbuck rouses from his quietude, 
takes a few turns along the planks, and, after a grave peep 
into the binnacle, says, with some touch of pleasantness, 
' Dinner, Mr. Stubb,' and descends the scuttle. The 
second Emir lounges about the rigging a while, and then 
slightly shaking the main-brace, to see whether it be 
all right with that important rope, he likewise takes up 
the old burden, and with a rapid * Dinner, Mr. Flask,' 
follows after his predecessors. 

But the third Emir, now seeing himself all alone on the 
quarter-deck, seems to feel relieved from some curious 
restraint ; for, tipping all sorts of knowing winks in all 
sorts of directions, and kicking off his shoes, he strikes 

184 



THE CABIN-TABLE 185 

into a sharp but noiseless squall of a hornpipe right over 
the Grand Turk's head ; and then, by a dexterous sleight, 
pitching his cap up into the mizen-top for a shelf, he goes 
down rollicking, so far at least as he remains visible from 
the deck, reversing all other processions by bringing up 
the rear with music. But ere stepping into the cabin 
doorway below, he pauses, ships a new face altogether, 
and then, independent, hilarious little Flask enters King 
Ahab's presence, in the character of Abjectus, or the 
Slave. 

It is not the least among the strange things bred by the 
intense artificialness of sea-usages, that while in the open 
air of the deck some officers will, upon provocation, bear 
themselves boldly and defyingly enough toward their com- 
mander ; yet, ten to one, let those very officers the next 
moment go down to their customary dinner in that same 
commander's cabin, and straightway their inoffensive, 
not to say deprecatory and humble air toward him, as 
he sits at the head of the table ; this is marvellous, some- 
times most comical. Wherefore this difference ? A 
problem ? Perhaps not. To have been Belshazzar, 
King of Babylon ; and to have been Belshazzar, not 
haughtily but courteously, therein certainly must have 
been some touch of mundane grandeur. But he who in 
the rightly regal and intelligent spirit presides over his 
own private dinner-table of invited guests, that man's 
unchallenged power and dominion of individual influ- 
ence for the time ; that man's royalty of state transcends 
Belshazzar 's, for Belshazzar was not the greatest. Who 
has but once dined his friends, has tasted what it is to be 
Caesar. It is a witchery of social czarship which there 
is no withstanding. Now, if to this consideration you 
superadd the official supremacy of a shipmaster, then, 
by inference, you will derive the cause of that peculiarity 
of sea-life just mentioned. 



186 MOBY-DICK 

Over his ivory-inlaid table, Ahab presided like a mute, 
maned sea-lion on the white coral beach, surrounded by 
his warlike but still deferential cubs. In his own proper 
turn, each officer waited to be served. They were as 
little children before Ahab ; and yet, in Ahab, there 
seemed not to lurk the smallest social arrogance. With 
one mind, their intent eyes all fastened upon the old man's 
knife, as he carved the chief dish before him. I do not 
suppose that for the world they would have profaned 
that moment with the slightest observation, even upon 
so neutral a topic as the weather. No ! And when 
reaching out his knife and fork, between which the slice 
of beef was locked, Ahab thereby motioned Starbuck's 
plate toward him, the mate received his meat as though 
receiving alms ; and cut it tenderly ; and a little started 
if, perchance, the knife grazed against the plate ; and 
chewed it noiselessly ; and swallowed it, not without 
circumspection. For, like the Coronation banquet at 
Frankfort, where the German Emperor profoundly dines 
with the seven Imperial Electors, so these cabin meals 
were somehow solemn meals, eaten in awful silence ; and 
yet at table old Ahab forbade not conversation ; only he 
himself was dumb. What a relief it was to choking Stubb, 
when a rat made a sudden racket in the hold below. And 
poor little Flask, he was the youngest son, and little boy 
of this weary family party. His were the shin-bones 
of the saline beef ; his would have been the drumsticks. 
For Flask to have presumed to help himself, this must 
have seemed to him tantamount to larceny in the first 
degree. Had he helped himself at that table, doubtless, 
never more would he have been able to hold his head up 
in this honest world ; nevertheless, strange to say, Ahab 
never forbade him. And had Flask helped himself, the 
chances were Ahab had never so much as noticed it. 
Least of all, did Flask presume to help himself to butter. 



THE CABIN-TABLE 187 

Whether he thought the owners of the ship denied it to 
him, on account of its clotting his clear, sunny com- 
plexion ; or whether he deemed that, on so long a voyage 
in such marketless waters, butter was at a premium, and 
therefore was not for him, a subaltern ; however it was, 
Flask, alas ! was a butterless man ! 

Another thing. Flask was the last person down at the 
dinner, and Flask is the first man up. Consider ! For 
hereby Flask's dinner was badly jammed in point of time. 
Starbuck and Stubb both had the start of him ; and yet 
they also have the privilege of lounging in the rear. If 
Stubb even, who is but a peg higher than Flask, happens 
to have but a small appetite, and soon shows symptoms 
of concluding his repast, then Flask must bestir himself, 
he will not get more than three mouthfuls that day ; for 
it is against holy usage for Stubb to precede Flask to the 
deck. Therefore it was that Flask once admitted in 
private, that ever since he had arisen to the dignity of an 
officer, from that moment he had never known what it 
was to be otherwise than hungry, more or less. For 
what he ate did not so much relieve his hunger, as keep 
it immortal hi him. Peace and satisfaction, thought 
Flask, have forever departed from my stomach. I am 
an officer ; but, how I wish I could fist a bit of old- 
fashioned beef in the forecastle, as I used to when I was 
before the mast. There 's the fruits of promotion now ; 
there 's the vanity of glory : there 's the insanity of life ! 
Besides, if it were so that any mere sailor of the Pequod 
had a grudge against Flask in Flask's official capacity, all 
that sailor had to do, in order to obtain ample vengeance, 
was to go aft at dinner-time, and get a peep at Flask 
through the cabin skylight, sitting silly and dumfoundered 
before awful Ahab. 

Now, Ahab and his three mates formed what may be 
called the first table in the Pequod' s cabin. After their 



188 MOBY-DICK 

departure, taking place in inverted order to their arrival, 
the canvas cloth was cleared, or rather was restored to 
some hurried order by the pallid steward. And then the 
three harpooneers were bidden to the feast, they being 
its residuary legatees. They made a sort of temporary 
servants' hall of the high and mighty cabin. 

In strange contrast to the hardly tolerable constraint 
and nameless invisible domineerings of the captain's table, 
was the entire care -free licence and ease, the almost frantic 
democracy of those inferior fellows the harpooneers. 
While their masters, the mates, seemed afraid of the 
sound of the hinges of their own jaws, the harpooneers 
chewed their food with such a relish that there was a 
report to it. They dined like lords ; they filled their 
bellies like Indian ships all day loading with spices. 
Such portentous appetites had Queequeg and Tashtego, 
that to fill out the vacancies made by the previous repast, 
often the pale Dough-Boy was fain to bring on a great 
baron of salt-junk, seemingly quarried out of the solid 
ox. And if he were not lively about it, if he did not go 
with a nimble hop-skip-and-jump, then Tashtego had an 
ungeiitlemanly way of accelerating him by darting a fork 
at his back, harpoon- wise. And once Daggoo, seized 
with a sudden humour, assisted Dough-Boy's memory by 
snatching him up bodily, and thrusting his head into a 
great empty wooden trencher, while Tashtego, knife in 
hand, began laying out the circle preliminary to scalping 
him. He was naturally a very nervous, shuddering sort 
of little fellow, this broad-faced steward ; the progeny 
of a bankrupt baker and a hospital nurse. And what 
with the standing spectacle of the black terrific Ahab, 
and the periodical tumultuous visitations of these three 
savages, Dough-Boy's whole life was one continual lip- 
quiver. Commonly, after seeing the harpooneers fur- 
nished with all things they demanded, he would escape 



THE CABIN-TABLE 189 

from their clutches into his little pantry adjoining, and 
fearfully peep out at them through the blinds of its door, 
till all was over. 

It was a sight to see Queequeg seated over against 
Tashtego, opposing his filed teeth to the Indian's : cross- 
wise to them, Daggoo seated on the floor, for a bench 
would have brought his hearse-plumed head to the low 
carlines ; at every motion of his colossal limbs, making 
the low cabin framework to shake, as when an African 
elephant goes passenger in a ship. But for all this, the 
great negro was wonderfully abstemious, not to say dainty. 
It seemed hardly possible that by such comparatively 
small mouthfuls he could keep up the vitality diffused 
through so broad, baronial, and superb a person. But, 
doubtless, this noble savage fed strong and drank deep 
of the abounding element of air ; and through his dilated 
nostrils snuffed in the sublime life of the worlds. Not by 
beef or by bread are giants made or nourished. But 
Queequeg, he had a mortal, barbaric smack of the lip in 
eating an ugly sound enough so much so, that the 
trembling Dough-Boy almost looked to see whether any 
marks of teeth lurked in his own lean arms. And when 
he would hear Tashtego singing out for him to produce 
himself, that his bones might be picked, the simple -witted 
steward all but shattered the crockery hanging round him 
in the pantry, by his sudden fits of the palsy. Nor did 
the whetstone which the harpooneers carried in their 
pockets, for their lances and other weapons ; and with 
which whetstones, at dinner, they would ostentatiously 
sharpen their knives ; that grating sound did not at all 
tend to tranquillise poor Dough-Boy. How could he 
forget that in his Island days, Queequeg, for one, must 
certainly have been guilty of some murderous, convivial 
indiscretions. Alas ! Dough-Boy ! hard fares the white 
waiter who waits upon cannibals. Not a napkin should 



190 MOBY-DICK 

he carry on his arm, but a buckler. In good time, 
though, to his great delight, the three salt-sea warriors 
would rise and depart ; to his credulous, fable-mongering 
ears, all their martial bones jingling in them at every step, 
like Moorish scimitars in scabbards. 

But, though these barbarians dined in the cabin, and 
nominally lived there ; still, being anything but seden- 
tary in their habits, they were scarcely ever in it except 
at meal-times, and just before sleeping-time, when they 
passed through it to their own peculiar quarters. 

In this one matter, Ahab seemed no exception to most 
American whale-captains, who, as a set, rather incline to 
the opinion that by rights the ship's cabin belongs to 
them ; and that it is by courtesy alone that anybody else 
is, at any time, permitted there. So that, in real truth, 
the mates and harpooneers of the Pequod might more 
properly be said to have lived out of the cabin than in 
it. For when they did enter it, it was something as a 
street-door enters a house ; turning inward for a moment, 
only to be turned out the next ; and, as a permanent 
thing, residing in the open air. Nor did they lose much 
hereby ; in the cabin was no companionship ; socially, 
Ahab was inaccessible. Though nominally included in 
the census of Christendom, he was still an alien to it. 
He lived in the world, as the last of the grizzly bears lived 
in settled Missouri. And as when spring and summer 
had departed, that wild Logan of the woods, burying 
himself in the hollow of a tree, lived out the winter there, 
sucking his own paws ; so, in his inclement, howling old 
age, Ahab's soul, shut up in the caved trunk of his body, 
there fed upon the sullen paws of its gloom ! 



CHAPTER XXXV 

THE MAST-HEAD 

IT was during the more pleasant weather, that in due 
rotation with the other seamen my first mast-head came 
round. 

In most American whalemen the mast-heads are 
manned almost simultaneously with the vessel's leaving 
her port - r even though she may have fifteen thousand 
miles, and more, to sail ere reaching her proper cruising- 
ground. And if, after a three, four, or five years' voyage 
she is drawing nigh home with anything empty in her 
say, an empty vial even then her mast-heads are kept 
manned to the last ; and not till her skysail-poles sail 
in among the spires of the port, does she altogether relin- 
quish the hope of capturing one whale more. 

Now, as the business of standing mast-heads, ashore or 
afloat, is a very ancient and interesting one, let us in some 
measure expatiate here. I take it, that the earliest 
standers of mast-heads were the old Egyptians ; because, 
in all my researches, I find none prior to them. For 
though their progenitors, the builders of Babel, must 
doubtless, by their tower, have intended to rear the 
loftiest mast-head in all Asia, or Africa either ; yet (ere 
the final truck was put to it) as that great stone mast of 
theirs may be said to have gone by the board, in the dread 
gale of God's wrath ; therefore, we cannot give these 
Babel builders priority over the Egyptians. And that 
the Egyptians were a nation of mast-head standers is 
an assertion based upon the general belief among archseo- 

191 



192 MOBY-DICK 

legists, that the first pyramids were founded for astro- 
nomical purposes : a theory singularly supported by the 
peculiar stair-like formation of all four sides of those 
edifices ; whereby, with prodigious long upliftings of their 
legs, those old astronomers were wont to mount to the 
apex, and sing out for new stars ; even as the look-outs 
of a modern ship sing out for a sail, or a whale just bearing 
in sight. In Saint Stylites, the famous Christian hermit 
of old times, who built him a lofty stone pillar in the 
desert and spent the whole latter portion of his life on its 
summit, hoisting his food from the ground with a tackle ; 
in him we have a remarkable instance of a dauntless 
stander of mast-heads ; who was not to be driven from 
his place by fogs or frosts, rain, hail, or sleet ; but vali- 
antly facing everything out to the last, literally died at 
his post. Of modern standers of mast-heads we have 
but a lifeless set ; mere stone, iron, and bronze men ; who, 
though well capable of facing out a stiff gale, are still 
entirely incompetent to the business of singing out upon 
discovering any strange sight. There is Napoleon ; who, 
upon the top of the column of Vendome, stands with arms 
folded, some one hundred and fifty feet in the air ; care- 
less, now, who rules the decks below ; whether Louis- 
Philippe, Louis Blanc, or Louis the Devil. Great 
Washington, too, stands high aloft on his towering main- 
mast in Baltimore, and like one of Hercules' pillars, his 
column marks that point of human grandeur beyond which 
few mortals will go. Admiral Nelson, also, on a capstan 
of gun-metal, stands his mast-head in Trafalgar Square ; 
and ever when most obscured by that London smoke, 
token is yet given that a hidden hero is there ; for where 
there is smoke, must be fire. But neither great Washing- 
ton, nor Napoleon, nor Nelson, will answer a single hail 
from below, however madly invoked to befriend by their 
counsels the distracted decks upon which they gaze ; 



THE MAST-HEAD 193 

however it' may be surmised, that their spirits penetrate 
through the thick haze of the future, and descry what 
shoals and what rocks must be shunned. 

It may seem unwarrantable to couple in any respect 
the mast-head standers of the land with those of the sea ; 
but that in truth it is not so, is plainly evinced by an item 
for which Obed Macy, the sole historian of Nantucket, 
stands accountable. The worthy Obed tells us, that in 
the early times of the whale-fishery, ere ships were regu- 
larly launched in pursuit of the game, the people of that 
island erected lofty spars along the sea-coast, to which 
the look-outs ascended by means of nailed cleats, some- 
thing as fowls go upstairs in a hen-house. A few years 
ago this same plan was adopted by the Bay whalemen of 
New Zealand, who, upon descrying the game, gave notice 
to the ready-manned boats nigh the beach. But this 
custom has now become obsolete ; turn we then to the 
one proper mast-head, that of a whale-ship at sea. The 
three mast-heads are kept manned from sunrise to sunset ; 
the seamen taking their regular turns (as at the helm), 
and relieving each other every two hours. In the serene 
weather of the Tropics it is exceedingly pleasant the mast- 
head ; nay, to a dreamy meditative man it is delightful. 
There you stand, a hundred feet above the silent decks, 
; striding along the deep, as if the masts were gigantic 
; stilts, while beneath you and between your legs, as it 
were, swim the hugest monsters of the sea, even as ships 
once sailed between the boots of the famous Colossus at 
old Rhodes. There you stand, lost in the infinite series 
of the sea, with nothing ruffled but the waves. The 
tranced ship indolently rolls ; the drowsy trade winds 
;blow ; everything resolves you into languor. For the 
most part, in this tropic whaling life, a sublime unevent- 
Mness invests you ; you hear no news ; read no gazettes ; 
;)xtras with startling accounts of commonplaces never 
VOL. i. N 



194 MOBY-DICK 

delude you into unnecessary excitements ; you hear of 
no domestic afflictions ; bankrupt securities ; fall of 
stocks ; are never troubled with the thought of what you 
shall have for dinner for all your meals for three years 
and more are snugly stowed in casks, and your bill of fare 
is immutable. 

In one of those Southern whalemen, on a long three or 
four years' voyage, as often happens, the sum of the various 
hours you spend at the mast-head would amount to several 
entire months. And it is much to be deplored that the 
place to which you devote so considerable a portion of 
the whole term of your natural life, should be so sadly 
destitute of anything approaching to a cosy inhabitive- 
ness, or adapted to breed a comfortable localness of feel- 
ing, such as pertains to a bed, a hammock, a hearse, a 
sentry-box, a pulpit, a coach, or any other of those small 
and snug contrivances in which men temporarily isolate 
themselves. Your most usual point of perch is the head 
of the t '-gallant-mast, where you stand upon two thin 
parallel sticks (almost peculiar to whalemen) called the 
t '-gallant-cross-trees. Here, tossed about by the sea, the 
beginner feels about as cosy as he would standing on a 
bull's horns. To be sure, in cold weather you may carry 
your house aloft with you, in the shape of a watch-coat ; 
but properly speaking the thickest watch-coat is no more 
of a house than the unclad body ; for as the soul is glued 
inside of its fleshly tabernacle, and cannot freely move 
about in it, nor even move out of it, without running great 
risk of perishing (like an ignorant pilgrim crossing the 
snowy Alps in winter) ; so a watch-coat is not so much 
of a house as it is a mere envelope, or additional skin 
encasing you. You cannot put a shelf or chest of drawers i 
in your body, and no more can you make a convenient 
closet of your watch-coat. 

Concerning all this, it is much to be deplored that the 



THE MAST-HEAD 195 

mast-heads of a Southern whale -ship are unprovided 
with those enviable little tents or pulpits, called crow's- 
nests, in which the look-outs of a Greenland whaler are 
protected from the inclement weather of the frozen seas. 
In the fireside narrative of Captain Sleet, entitled A 
Voyage among the Icebergs, in quest of the Greenland Whale, 
and incidentally for the re-discovery of the Lost Icelandic 
Colonies of Old Greenland ; in this admirable volume, all 
standers of mast-heads are furnished with a charmingly 
circumstantial account of the then recently invented 
crow's-nest of the Glacier, which was the name of Captain 
Sleet's good craft. He called it the Sleet's crow's-nest, in 
honour of himself ; he being the original inventor and 
patentee, and free from all ridiculous false delicacy, and 
holding that if we call our own children after our own 
names (we fathers being the original inventors and 
patentees), so likewise should we denominate after our- 
selves any other apparatus we may beget. In shape, 
the Sleet's crow's-nest is something like a large tierce or 
pipe ; it is open above, however, where it is furnished 
with a movable side -screen to keep to windward of your 
head in a hard gale. Being fixed on the summit of the 
mast, you ascend into it through a little trap-hatch in 
the bottom. On the after side, or side next the stern of 
the ship, is a comfortable seat, with a locker underneath 
for umbrellas, comforters, and coats. In front is a 
leather rack, hi which to keep your speaking trumpet, 
pipe, telescope, and other nautical conveniences. When 
Captain Sleet in person stood his mast-head hi this crow's- 
nest of his, he tells us that he always had a rifle with him 
(also fixed in the rack), together with a powder-flask and 
shot, for the purpose of popping off the stray narwhales, 
or vagrant sea-unicorns infesting those waters ; for you 
cannot successfully shoot at them from the deck owing to 
the resistance of the water, but to shoot down upon them 



196 MOBY-DICK 

is a very different thing. Now, it was plainly a labour 
of love for Captain Sleet to describe, as he does, all the 
little detailed conveniences of his crow's-nest ; but though 
he so enlarges upon many of these, and though he treats 
us to a very scientific account of his experiments in this 
crow's-nest, with a small compass he kept there for the 
purpose of counteracting the errors resulting from what 
is called the ' local attraction ' of all binnacle magnets ; 
an error ascribable to the horizontal vicinity of the iron 
in the ship's planks, and in the Glacier's case, perhaps, to 
there having been so many broken-down blacksmiths 
among her crew ; I say, that though the captain is very 
discreet and scientific here, yet, for all his learned ' bin- 
nacle deviations,' ' azimuth compass observations,' and 
' approximate errors,' he knows very well, Captain Sleet, 
that he was not so much immersed in those profound 
magnetic meditations, as to fail being attracted occasion- 
ally toward that well-replenished little case-bottle, so 
nicely tucked in on one side of his crow's-nest, within 
easy reach of his hand. Though, upon the whole, I 
greatly admire and even love the brave, the honest, and 
learned captain ; yet I take it very ill of him that he 
should so utterly ignore that case-bottle, seeing what a 
faithful friend and comforter it must have been, while 
with mittened fingers and hooded head he was studying 
the mathematics aloft there in that bird's nest within 
three or four perches of the pole. 

But if we Southern whale -fishers are not so snugly 
housed aloft as Captain Sleet and his Greenland men 
were ; yet that disadvantage is greatly counterbalanced 
by the widely contrasting serenity of those seductive 
seas in which we South fishers mostly float. For one, I 
used to lounge up the rigging very leisurely, resting hi 
the top to have a chat with Queequeg, or anyone else off 
duty whom I might find there ; then ascending a littl 



THE MAST-HEAD 197 

way further, and throwing a lazy leg over the topsail- 
yard, take a preliminary view of the watery pastures, 
and so at last mount to my ultimate destination. 

Let me make a clean breast of it here, and frankly 
admit that I kept but sorry guard. With the problem 
of the universe revolving in me, how could I being left 
completely to myself at such a thought-engendering alti- 
tude, how could I but lightly hold my obligations to 
observe all whale -ships' standing orders, ' Keep your 
weather-eye open, and sing out every time ' ? 

And let me in this place movingly admonish you, ye 
shipowners of Nantucket ! Beware of enlisting in your 
vigilant fisheries any lad with lean brow and hollow eye ; 
given to unseasonable meditativeness ; and who offers 
to ship with the Phsedon instead of Bowditch in his head. 
Beware of such an one, I say : your whales must be seen 
before they can be killed ; and this sunken-eyed young 
Platonist will tow you ten wakes round the world, and 
never make you one pint of sperm the richer. Nor are 
these monitions at all unneeded. For nowadays, the 
whale-fishery furnishes an asylum for many romantic, 
melancholy, and absent-minded young men, disgusted 
with the carking cares of earth, and seeking sentiment in 
tar and blubber. Childe Harold not unfrequently perches 
himself upon the mast-head of some luckless disappointed 
whale-ship, and in moody phrase ejaculates : 

1 Roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean, roll ! 
Ten thousand blubber-hunters sweep over thee in vain.' 

Very often do the captains of such ships take those 
absent-minded young philosophers to task, upbraiding 
them with not feeling sufficient ' interest ' in the voyage ; 
half -hinting that they are so hopelessly lost to all honour- 
able ambition, as that in their secret souls they would 
rather not see whales than otherwise. But all in vain ; 



198 MOBY-DICK 

those young Platonists have a notion that their vision 
is imperfect ; they are short-sighted ; what use, then, to 
strain the visual nerve ? They have left their opera- 
glasses at home. 

' Why, thou monkey, ' said a harpooneer to one of these 
lads, ' we 've been cruising now hard upon three years, 
and thou hast not raised a whale yet. Whales are scarce 
as hen's teeth whenever thou art up here.' Perhaps they 
were ; or perhaps there might have been shoals of them 
in the far horizon ; but lulled into such an opium-like 
listlessness of vacant, unconscious revery is this absent- 
minded youth by the blending cadence of waves with 
thoughts, that at last he loses his identity ; takes the 
mystic ocean at his feet for the visible image of that deep, 
blue, bottomless soul, pervading mankind and nature ; 
and every strange, half -seen, gliding, beautiful thing that 
eludes him ; every dimly discovered, uprising fin of some 
undiscernible form, seems to him the embodiment of 
those elusive thoughts that only people the soul by con- 
tinually flitting through it. In this enchanted mood, 
thy spirit ebbs away to whence it came ; becomes diffused 
through time and space ; like Cranmer's sprinkled Pan- 
theistic ashes, forming at last a part of every shore the 
round globe over. 

There is no life in thee, now, except that rocking life 
imparted by a gently rolling ship ; by her, borrowed from 
the sea ; by the sea, from the inscrutable tides of God. 
But while this sleep, this dream is on ye, move your foot 
or hand an inch ; slip your hold at all ; and your identity 
comes back in horror. Over Descartian vortices you 
hover. And perhaps, at mid-day, in the fairest weather, 
with one half-throttled shriek you drop through that 
transparent air into the summer sea, no more to rise for- 
ever. Heed it well, ye Pantheists ! 



CHAPTER XXXVI 

THE QUARTEK-DECK 

(Enter Ahab : Then all.) 

IT was not a great while after the affair of the pipe, that 
one morning shortly after breakfast, Ahab, as was his 
wont, ascended the cabin-gangway to the deck. There 
most sea-captains usually walk at that hour, as country 
gentlemen, after the same meal, take a few turns in 
the garden. 

Soon his steady, ivory stride was heard, as to and fro 
he paced his old rounds, upon planks so familiar to his 
tread, that they were all over dented, like geological 
stones, with the peculiar mark of his walk. Did you 
fixedly gaze, too, upon that ribbed and dented brow ; 
there also, you would see still stranger footprints the 
footprints of his one unsleeping, ever-pacing thought. 

But on the occasion hi question, those dents looked 
deeper, even as his nervous step that morning left a 
deeper mark. And, so full of his thought was Ahab, that 
at every uniform turn that he made, now at the main- 
mast and now at the binnacle, you could almost see 
that thought turn in him as he turned, and pace in him 
as he paced ; so completely possessing him, indeed, 
that it all but seemed the inward mould of every outer 
movement. 

' D' ye mark him, Flask ? ' whispered Stubb ; * the 
chick that 's in him pecks the shell. 'Twill soon be out.' 

The hours wore on ; Ahab now shut up within his 

199 



200 MOBY-DICK 

cabin ; anon, pacing the deck, with the same intense 
bigotry of purpose in his aspect. 

It drew near the close of day. Suddenly he came to a 
halt by the bulwarks, and inserting his bone leg into the 
auger-hole there, and with one hand grasping a shroud, 
he ordered Starbuck to send everybody aft. 

' Sir ! ' said the mate, astonished at an order seldom 
or never given on shipboard except in some extraordinary 
case. 

' Send everybody aft,' repeated Ahab. ' Mast-heads, 
there ! come down ! ' 

When the entire ship's company were assembled, and 
with curious and not wholly unapprehensive faces were 
eyeing him, for he looked not unlike the weather horizon 
when a storm is coming up, Ahab, after rapidly glancing 
over the bulwarks, and then darting his eyes among the 
crew, started from his standpoint ; and as though not a 
soul were nigh him resumed his heavy turns upon the 
deck. With bent head and half-slouched hat he con- 
tinued to pace, unmindful of the wondering whispering 
among the men ; till Stubb cautiously whispered to 
Flask, that Ahab must have summoned them there for 
the purpose of witnessing a pedestrian feat. But this 
did not last long. Vehemently pausing, he cried : 

' What do ye do when ye see a whale, men ? ' 

' Sing out for him ! ' was the impulsive rejoinder from 
a score of clubbed voices. 

4 Good ! ' cried Ahab, with a wild approval in his tones ; 
observing the hearty animation into which his unexpected 
question had so magnetically thrown them. 

' And what do ye next, men ? ' 

' Lower away, and after him ! ' 

' And what tune is it ye pull to, men ? ' 

' A dead whale or a stove boat ! ' 

More and more strangely and fiercely glad and approv- 



THE QUARTER-DECK 201 

ing grew the countenance of the old man at every 
shout ; while the mariners began to gaze curiously at 
each other, as if marvelling how it was that they them- 
selves became so excited at such seemingly purposeless 
questions. 

But, they were all eagerness again, as Ahab, now half- 
revolving in his pivot -hole, with one hand reaching high 
up a shroud, and tightly, almost convulsively grasping 
it, addressed them thus : 

' All ye mast-headers have before now heard me give 
orders about a white whale. Look ye ! d' ye see this 
Spanish ounce of gold*? ' holding up a broad bright 
coin to the sun ' it is a sixteen-dollar piece, men. D' ye 
see it ? Mr. Starbuck, hand me yon top-maul/ 

While the mate was getting the hammer, Ahab, without 
speaking, was slowly rubbing the gold piece against the 
skirts of his jacket, as if to heighten its lustre, and without 
using any words was meanwhile lowly humming to him- 
self, producing a sound so strangely muffled and inarticu- 
late that it seemed the mechanical humming of the wheels 
of his vitality in him. 

Receiving the top-maul from Starbuck, he advanced 
toward the mainmast with the hammer uplifted in one 
hand, exhibiting the gold with the other, and with a high 
raised voice exclaiming : ' Whosoever of ye raises me a 
white-headed whale with a wrinkled brow and a crooked 
jaw ; whosoever of ye raises me that white-headed whale, 
with three holes punctured in his starboard fluke look 
ye, whosoever of ye raises me that same white whale, 
he shall have this gold ounce, my boys ! ' 

' Huzza ! huzza ! ' cried the seamen, as with swinging 
tarpaulins they hailed the act of nailing the gold to 
the mast. 

' It 's a white whale, I say,' resumed Ahab, as he threw 
down the top-maul ; * a white whale. Skin your eyes 



202 MOBY-DICK 

for him, men ; look sharp for white water ; if ye see but 
a bubble, sing out.' 

All this while Tashtego, Daggoo, and Queequeg had 
looked on with even more intense interest and surprise 
than the rest, and at the mention of the wrinkled brow 
and crooked jaw they had started as if each was separately 
touched by some specific recollection. 

' Captain Ahab,' said Tashtego, ' that white whale must 
be the same that some call Moby-Dick.' 

' Moby-Dick ? ' shouted Ahab. ' Do ye know the white 
whale then, Tash ? ' 

' Does he fan-tail a little curious, sir, before he goes 
down ? ' said the Gay-Header deliberately. 

' And has he a curious spout, too,' said Daggoo, ' very 
bushy, even for a parmacetty, and mighty quick, Captain 
Ahab ? ' 

1 And he have one, two, tree oh ! good many iron 
in him hide, too, captain,' cried Queequeg disjointedly, 

4 all twiske-tee be-twisk, like him him ' faltering 

hard for a word, and screwing his hand round and round 
as though uncorking a bottle ' like him him ' 

' Cork-screw ! ' cried Ahab, ' ay, Queequeg, the har- 
poons lie all twisted and wrenched in him ; ay, Daggoo, 
his spout is a big one, like a whole shock of wheat, and 
white as a pile of our Nantucket wool after the great 
annual sheep-shearing ; ay, Tashtego, and he fan-tails 
like a split jib in a squall. Death and devils ! men, it is 
Moby-Dick ye have seen Moby-Dick Moby-Dick ! ' 

' Captain Ahab,' said Starbuck, who, with Stubb and 
Flask, had thus far been eyeing his superior with increasing 
surprise, but at last seemed struck with a thought which 
somewhat explained all the wonder. ' Captain Ahab, 
I have heard of Moby-Dick but it was not Moby-Dick 
that took off thy leg ? ' 

' Who told thee that ? ' cried Ahab ; then pausing, 



THE QUARTER-DECK 203 

' Ay, Starbuck ; ay, my hearties all round ; it was 
Moby-Dick that dismasted me ; Moby-Dick that brought 
me to this dead stump I stand on now. Ay, ay,' he 
shouted, with a terrific, loud, animal sob, like that of a 
heart -stricken moose ; ' Ay, ay ! it was that accursed 
white whale that razeed me ; made a poor pegging lubber 
of me for ever and a day ! ' Then tossing both arms, 
with measureless imprecations he shouted out : ' Ay, 
ay ! and I '11 chase him round Good Hope, and round 
the Horn, and round the Norway Maelstrom, and round 
perdition's flames before I give him up. And this is what 
ye have shipped for, men ! to chase that white whale on 
both sides of land, and over all sides of earth, till he spouts 
black blood and rolls fin out. What say ye, men, will ye 
splice hands on it, now ? I think ye do look brave/ 

* Ay, ay ! ' shouted the harpooneers and seamen, 
running closer to the excited old man : ' a sharp eye for 
the White Whale ; a sharp lance for Moby-Dick ! ' 

' God bless ye,' he seemed to half sob and half shout. 
' God bless ye, men. Steward ! go draw the great 
measure of grog. But what 's this long face about, Mr. 
Starbuck ; wilt thou not chase the White Whale ? art not 
game for Moby-Dick ? ' 

' I am game for his crooked jaw, and for the jaws of 
Death too, Captain Ahab, if it fairly comes in the way of 
the business we follow ; but I came here to hunt whales, 
not my commander's vengeance. How many barrels 
will thy vengeance yield thee even if thou gettest it, 
Captain Ahab ? it will not fetch thee much in our Nan- 
tucket market.' 

' Nantucket market ! Hoot ! But come closer, Star- 
buck ; thou requirest a little lower layer. If money 's 
to be the measurer, man, and the accountants have com- 
puted their great counting-house the globe, by girdling 
it with guineas, one to every three parts of an inch ; then, 



204 MOBY-DICK 

let me tell thee, that my vengeance will fetch a great 
premium here ! ' 

' He smites his chest/ whispered Stubb, ' what 's that 
for ? methinks it rings most vast, but hollow.' 

' Vengeance on a dumb brute ! ' cried Starbuck, ' that 
simply smote thee from blindest instinct ! Madness ! 
To be enraged with a dumb thing, Captain Ahab, seems 
\ blapkemous.' 

' Hark ye yet again, the little lower layer. All visible 
objects, man, are but as pasteboard masks. But in each 
event in the living act, the undoubted deed there, some 
unknown but still reasoning thing puts forth the mouldings 
of its features from behind the unreasoning mask. If man 
will strike, strike through the mask ! How can the prisoner 
reach outside except by thrusting through the wall ? To 
me, the White Whale is that wall, shoved near to me. 
Sometimes I think there 's naught beyond. But 'tis 
enough. He tasks me ; he heaps me ; I see in him out- 
rageous strength, with an inscrutable malice sinewing it. 
That inscrutable thing is chiefly what I hate ; and be the 
White Whale agent, or be the White Whale principal, I will 
wreak that hate upon him. Talk not to me of blasphemy, 
man ; I 'd strike the sun if it insulted me. For could the 
sun do that, then could I do the other ; since there is ever 
a sort of fair play herein, jealousy presiding over all 
creations. But not my master, man, is even that fair 
play. Who 's over me ? Truth hath no confines. Take 
off thine eye ! more intolerable than fiends' glarings is a 
doltish stare ! So, so ; thou reddenest and palest ; my 
heat has melted thee to anger-glow. But look ye, Star- 
buck, what is said in heat, that thing unsays itself. There 
are men from whom warm words are small indignity. I 
meant not to incense thee. Let it go. Look ! see yonder 
Turkish cheeks of spotted tawn living, breathing pictures 
painted by the sun. The pagan leopards the unrecking 






THE QUARTER-DECK 205 

and un worshipping things, that live ; and seek, and give 
no reasons for the torrid life they feel ! The crew, man, 
the crew ! Are they not one and all with Ahab, in this 
matter of the whale ? See Stubb ! he laughs ! See 
yonder Chilian ! he snorts to think of it. Stand up amid 
the general hurricane, thy one tost sapling cannot, Star- 
buck ! And what is it ? Reckon it. 'Tis but to help 
strike a fin ; no wondrous feat for Starbuck. What is it 
more ? From this one poor hunt, then, the best lance 
out of all Nantucket, surely he will not hang back, when 
every foremast -hand has clutched a whetstone ? Ah ! 
constrainings seize thee ; I see ! the billow lifts thee ! 
Speak, but speak ! Ay, ay ! thy silence, then, that 
voices thee. (Aside) Something shot from my dilated 
nostrils, he has inhaled it in his lungs. Starbuck now is 
mine ; cannot oppose me now, without rebellion.' 

4 God keep me ! keep us all ! ' murmured Starbuck 
lowly. 

But in his joy at the enchanted, tacit acquiescence of the 
mate, Ahab did not hear his foreboding invocation ; nor 
yet the low laugh from the hold ; nor yet the presaging 
vibrations of the winds in the cordage ; nor yet the hollow 
flap of the sails against the masts, as for a moment their 
hearts sank in. For again Starbuck's downcast eyes 
lighted up with the stubbornness of life ; the subterranean 
laugh died away ; the winds blew on ; the sails filled out ; 
the ship heaved and rolled as before. Ah, ye admoni- 
tions and warnings ! why stay ye not when ye come ? 
But rather are ye predictions than warnings, ye shadows ! 
Yet not so much predictions from without, as verifications 
of the foregoing things within. For with little external 
to constrain us, the innermost necessities in our being, 
these still drive us on. 

' The measure ! the measure ! ' cried Ahab. 

Receiving the brimming pewter, and turning to the 



206 MOBY-DICK 

harpooneers, he ordered them to produce their weapons. 
Then ranging them before him near the capstan, with 
their harpoons in their hands, while his three mates stood 
at his side with their lances, and the rest of the ship's 
company formed a circle round the group ; he stood for 
an instant searchingly eyeing every man of his crew. 
But those wild eyes met his, as the bloodshot eyes of the 
prairie wolves meet the eye of their leader, ere he rushes 
on at their head in the trail of the bison ; but, alas ! only 
to fall into the hidden snare of the Indian. 

* Drink and pass ! ' he cried, handing the heavy charged 

flagon to the nearest seaman. ' The crew alone now 

drink. Round with it, round ! Short draughts long 

swallows, men ; 'tis hot as Satan's hoof. So, so ; it goes 

round excellently. It spiralises in ye ; forks out at the 

serpent -snapping eye. Well done ; almost drained. 

That way it went, this way it comes. Hand it me 

j here 's a hollow ! Men, ye seem the years ; so brimming 

! life is gulped and gone. Steward, refill ! 

' Attend now, my braves. I have mustered ye all 
round this capstan ; and ye, mates, flank me with your 
lances ; and ye, harpooneers, stand there with your irons ; 
and ye, stout mariners, ring me in, that I may in some 
sort revive a noble custom of my fisherman fathers before 

me. men, you will yet see that Ha ! boy, come 

back ? bad pennies come not sooner. Hand it me. Why, 
now, this pewter had run brimming again, wert not thou 
St. Vitus' imp away, thou ague ! 

' Advance, ye mates ! Cross your lances full before me. 
Well done ! Let me touch the axis.' So saying, with 
extended arm, he grasped the three level, radiating lances 
at their crossed centre ; while so doing, suddenly and 
nervously twitched them ; meanwhile, glancing intently 
from Starbuck to Stubb, from Stubb to Flask. It 
seemed as though, by some nameless, interior volition, 



THE QUARTER-DECK 207 

he would fain have shocked into them the same fiery 
emotion accumulated within the Leyden jar of his own 
magnetic life. The three mates quailed before his strong, 
sustained, and mystic aspect. Stubb and Flask looked 
sideways from him ; the honest eye of Starbuck fell 
downright. 

' In vain ! ' cried Ahab ; ' but, maybe, 'tis well. For 
did ye three but once take the full-forced shock, then 
mine own electric thing, that had perhaps expired from 
out me. Perchance, too, it would have dropped ye dead. 
Perchance ye need it not. Down lances ! And now, ye 
mates, I do appoint ye three cup-bearers to my three 
pagan kinsmen there yon three most honourable gentle- 
men and noblemen, my valiant harpooneers. Disdain 
the task ? What, when the great Pope washes the feet 
of beggars, using his tiara for ewer ? Oh, my sweet 
cardinals ! your own condescension, that shall bend ye 
to it. I do not order ye ; ye will it. Cut your seizings 
and draw the poles, ye harpooneers ! ' 

Silently obeying the order, the three harpooneers now 
stood with the detached iron part of their harpoons, some 
three feet long, held, barbs up, before him. 

' Stab me not with that keen steel ! Cant them ; 
cant them over ! know ye not the goblet end ? Turn 
up the socket ! So, so ; now, ye cup-bearers, advance. 
The irons ! take them ; hold them while I fill ! ' Forth- 
with, slowly going from one officer to the other, he 
brimmed the harpoon sockets with the fiery waters from 
the pewter. 

' Now, three to three, ye stand. Commend the murder- 
ous chalices ! Bestow them, ye who are now made 
parties to this indissoluble league. Ha ! Starbuck ! but 
the deed is done ! Yon ratifying sun now waits to sit 
upon it. Drink, ye harpooneers ! drink and swear, ye 
men that man the deathful whale-boat's bow Death to 1 



208 MOBY-DICK 

Moby-Dick ! God hunt us all, if we do not hunt Moby- 
Dick to his death ! ' The long, barbed steel goblets were 
lifted ; and to cries and maledictions against the White 
Whale, the spirits were simultaneously quaffed down with 
a hiss. Starbuck paled, and turned, and shivered. Once 
more, and finally, the replenished pewter went the rounds 
among the frantic crew ; when, waving his free hand to 
them, they all dispersed ; and Ahab retired within his 
cabin. 



CHAPTER XXXVII 

SUNSET 

(The cabin ; by the stern windows ; Ahab sitting alone, 
and gazing out.) 

I LEAVE a white and turbid wake ; pale waters, paler 
cheeks, where'er I sail. The envious billows sidelong swell 
to whelm my track ; let them ; but first I pass. 

Yonder, by the ever-brimming goblet's rim, the warm 
waves blush like wine. The gold brow plumbs the blue. 
The diver sun slow dived from noon, goes down ; my 
soul mounts up ! she wearies with her endless hill. Is, 
then, the crown too heavy that I wear ? this Iron Crown 
of Lombardy. Yet is it bright with many a gem ; I, the 
wearer, see not its far flashings ; but darkly feel that I 
wear that, that dazzlingly confounds. 'Tis iron that 
I know not gold. 'Tis split, too that I feel ; the 
jagged edge galls me so, my brain seems to beat against 
the solid metal ; ay, steel skull, mine ; the sort that 
needs no helmet in the most brain-battering fight ! 

Dry heat upon my brow ? Oh ! time was, when as 
the sunrise nobly spurred me, so the sunset soothed. No 
more. This lovely light, it lights not me ; all loveliness 
is anguish to me, since I can ne'er enjoy. Gifted with the 



high perception, I lack the low, enjoying power ; damned, 
most subtly ana most malignantly ! damned in the midst , 
of Paradise ! Good night good night ! (Waving his ' 
hand, he moves from the window.) 

'Twas not so hard a task. I thought to find one stub- 

VOL. I. O 






210 MOBY-DICK 

born, at the least ; but my one cogged circle fits into all 
their various wheels, and they revolve. Or, if you will, 
like so many ant-hills of powder, they all stand before me ; 
and I their match. Oh, hard ! that to fire others, the 
match itself must needs be wasting ! What I Ve dared, 
I Ve willed ; and what I Ve willed, I '11 do ! They think 
me mad Starbuck does ; but I 'm demoniac, I am mad- 
ness maddened ! That wild madness that 's only calm 
to comprehend itself ! The prophecy was that I should 
be dismembered ; and Ay ! I lost this leg. I now 
prophesy that I will dismember my dismemberer. JJow* 
then, be the prophet and the fulfiUer one. That 's more 
than ye, ye great gods, ever were. I laugh and hoot at 
ye, ye cricket -players, ye pugilists, ye deaf Burkes and 
blinded Bendigoes ! I will not say as schoolboys do to 
bullies, Take some one of your own size ; don't pommel 
me \ No, ye Ve knocked me down, and I am up again ; 
but ye have run and hidden. Come forth from behind 
your cotton bags ! I have no long gun to reach ye. 
Come, Ahab's compliments to ye ; come and see if ye can 
swerve me. Swerve me ? ye cannot swerve me, else ye 
swerve yourselves ! man has ye there. Swerve me ? 
The path to my fixed purpose is laid with iron rails, where - 
on" my soul is grooved to run. Over unsounded gorges, 
through the rifled hearts of mountains, under torrents' 
beds, unerringly I rush ! Naught J s an obstacle, naught 's 
an angle to the iron way ! 



CHAPTER XXXVIII 

DUSK 

(By the mainmast ; Starbuck leaning against it.) 

MY soul is* more than matched ; she 's overmanned ; 
and by a madman ! Insufferable sting, that sanity should 
ground arms on such a field ! But he drilled deep down, 
and blasted all my reason out of me ! I think I see his 
impious end ; but feel that I must help him to it. Will I, 
nill I, the ineffable thing has tied me to him ; tows me 
with a cable I have no knife to cut. Horrible old man ! 
Who 's over him, he cries ; ay, he would be a democrat \^ 
to all above ; look, how he lords it over all below ! Oh ! 
I plainly see my miserable office, to obey, rebelling ; and 
worse yet, to hate with touch of pity ! For in his eyes I 
read some lurid woe would shrivel me up, had I it. Yet 
is there hope. Time and tide flow wide. The hated 
whale has the round watery world to swim in, as the small 
gold-fish has its glassy globe. His heaven-insulting pur- 
pose, God may wedge aside. I would up heart, were it 
not like lead. But my whole clock 's run down ; my 
heart the all-controlling weight, I have no key to lift 
again. 

(A burst of revelry from the forecastle.) 

Oh, God ! to sail with such a heathen crew that have 
small touch of human mothers in them ! Whelped some- 
where by the sharkish sea. The White Whale is their 
demigorgon. Hark ! the infernal orgies ! that revelry 
is forward ! mark the unfaltering silence aft ! Methinks 

211 



212 



MOBY-DICK 



it pictures life. Foremost through the sparkling sea 
shoots on the gay, embattled, bantering bow, but only to 
drag dark Ahab after it, where he broods within his stern- 
ward cabin, builded over the dead water of the wake, 
and further on, hunted by its wolfish gurglings. The long 
howl thrills me through ! Peace ! ye revellers, and set 
the watch ! Oh, life ! 'tis in an hour like this, with soul 
beat down and held to knowledge, as wild, untutored 
things are forced to feed Oh, life ! 'tis now that I do feel 
the latent horror in thee ! but 'tis not me ! that horror 's 



out of me ! and with the soft feeling of ^ejiuman in me, 
yet ^will I try to fight ye, "ye grim, phantom futures ! 
Stand by me, hold me, bind me, ye blessed influences ! 



CHAPTER XXXIX 

FIRST NIGHT-WATCH 
FORE-TOP 

(Stubb solus, and mending a brace.) 

HA ! ha ! ha ! ha ! hem ! clear my throat ! I Ve been 
thinking over it ever since, and that ha, ha 3 s the final 
consequence. Why so ? Because a laugh 's the wisest, 
easiest answer to all that 's queer ; and come what will, 
one comfort 's always left that unfailing comfort is, it 's 
all predestinated. I heard not all his talk with Starbuck ; 
but to my poor eye Starbuck then looked something as I 
the other evening felt. Be sure the old Mogul has fixed 
him, too. I twigged it, knew it ; had had the gift, might 
readily have prophesied it for when I clapped my eye 
upon his skull I saw it. Well, Stubb, wise Stubb that 's 
my title well, Stubb, what of it, Stubb ? Here 's a 
carcase. I know not all that may be coming, but be it 
what it will, I '11 go to it laughing. Such a waggish 
leering as lurks in all your horribles ! I feel funny. Fa, 
la ! lirra, skirra ! What 's my juicy little pear at home 
doing now ? Crying its eyes out ? Giving a party to the 
last arrived harpooneers, I dare say, gay as a frigate's 
pennant, and so am I fa, la ! lirra, skirra ! Oh 

We '11 drink to-night with hearts as light, 

To love, as gay and fleeting 
As bubbles that swim, on the beaker's brim, 

And break on the lips while meeting. 

A brave stave that who calls ? Mr. Starbuck ? 
Ay, ay, sir (Aside) he 's my superior, he has his too, 
if I 'm not mistaken. Ay, ay, sir, just through with this 
job coming. 

213 



CHAPTER XL 

MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE 
HABPOONEERS AND SAILORS 

(Foresail rises and discovers the match standing, lounging, 
leaning, and lying in various attitudes, all singing in chorus.) 

Farewell and adieu to you, Spanish ladies ! 
Farewell and adieu to you, ladies of Spain ! 
Our captain's commanded. 

1ST NANTUCKET SAILOE. 

Oh, boys, don't be sentimental ; it 's bad for the 
digestion ! Take a tonic, follow me ! 

(Sings, and all follow.) 

Our captain stood upon the deck, 

A spy-glass in his hand, 
A-viewing of those gallant whales 

That blew at every strand. 
Oh, your tubs in your boats, my boys, 

And by your braces stand, 
And we '11 have one of those fine whales, 

Hand, boys, over hand ! 

So, be cheery, my lads ! may your hearts never fail ! 
While the bold harpooneer is striking the whale ! 

MATE'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK. 
Eight bells there, forward ! 

214 



MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE 215 

2ND NANTUCKET SAILOR. 

Avast the chorus ! Eight bells there ! <T ye hear, 
bell-boy ? Strike the bell eight, thou Pip ! thou black- 
ling ! and let me call the watch. I 've the sort of mouth 
for that the hogshead mouth. So, so, (thrusts his head 
down the scuttle) Star bo-1-e-e-n-s, a-h-o-y ! Eight 
bells there below ! Tumble up ! 

DUTCH SAILOR. 

Grand snoozing to-night, maty ; fat night for that. 
I mark this in our old Mogul's wine ; it 's quite as deaden- 
ing to some as filliping to others. We sing ; they sleep- 
ay, lie down there, like ground-tier butts. At 'em again ! 
There, take this copper-pump, and hail 'em through it. 
Tell 'em to avast dreaming of their lasses. Tell 'em it 's 
the resurrection ; they must kiss their last, and come to 
judgment. That 's the way that 's it ; thy throat ain't 
spoiled with eating Amsterdam butter. 

FRENCH SAILOR. 

Hist, boys ! let 's have a jig or two before we ride to 
anchor in Blanket Bay. What say ye ? There comes 
the other watch. Stand by, all legs ! Pip ! little Pip ! 
hurrah with your tambourine ! 

PIP. 

(Sulky and sleepy.) 
Don't know where it is. 

FRENCH SAILOR. 

Beat thy belly, then, and wag thy ears. Jig it, men, 
I say ; merry 's the word ; hurrah ! Damn me, won't 
you dance ? Form, now, Indian-file, and gallop into the 
double-shuffle ! Throw yourselves ! Legs ! legs ! 



216 MOBY-DICK 

ICELAND SAILOE. 

I don't like your floor, maty ; it 's too springy to my 
taste. I 'm used to ice-floors. I 'm sorry to throw cold 
water on the subject ; but excuse me. 

MALTESE SAILOR. 

Me too ; where 's your girls ? Who but a fool would 
take his left hand by his right, and say to himself, how 
d' ye do ? Partners ! I must have partners ! 

SICILIAN SAILOR. 

Ay ; girls and a green ! then I '11 hop with ye ; yea, 
turn grasshopper ! 

LONG-ISLAND SAILOR. 

Well, well, ye sulkies, there 's plenty more of us. Hoe 
corn when you may, say I. All legs go to harvest soon. 
Ah ! here comes the music ; now for it ! 

AZORE SAILOR. 

(Ascending, and pitching the tambourine up the scuttle.) 

Here you are, Pip ; and there J s the windlass-bitts ; 
up you mount ! Now, boys ! 

(The half of them dance to the tambourine ; some go 
below ; some sleep or lie among the coils of rigging. Oaths 
a-plenty.) 

AZORE SAILOR. 

(Dancing.) 

Go it, Pip ! Bang it, bell-boy ! Rig, it, dig it, stig it, 
quig it, bell-boy ! Make fire-flies ; break the jinglers ! 

PIP. 

Jinglers, you say ? there goes another, dropped off ; 
I pound it so. 



MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE 217 



CHINA SAILOR. 



Rattle thy teeth, then, and pound away ; make a 
pagoda of thyself. 

FRENCH SAILOR. 

Merry-mad ! Hold up thy hoop, Pip, till I jump 
through it ! Split jibs ! tear yourselves ! 

TASHTEGO. 

(Quietly smoking.) 

That 's a white man ; he calls that fun : humph ! I j 
save my sweat. 

OLD MANX SAILOR. 

I wonder whether those jolly lads bethink them of what 
they are dancing over. I '11 dance over your grave, I will 
that 's the bitterest threat of your night-women, that 
beat head- winds round corners. O Christ ! to think of 
the green navies and the green-skulled crews ! Well, 
well ; belike the whole world 's a ball, as you scholars 
have it ; and so 'tis right to make one ball-room of it. 
Dance on, lads, you 're young ; I was once. 

3RD NANTUCKET SAILOR. 

Spell oh ! whew ! this is worse than pulling after 
whales in a calm give us a whiff, Tash. 

(They cease dancing, and gather in clusters. Meantime 
the sky darkens the wind rises.) 

LASCAR SAILOR. 

By Brahma ! boys, it '11 be douse sail soon. The 
sky-born, high -tide Ganges turned to wind ! Thou 
showest thy black brow, Seeva ! 



218 MOBY-DICK 

MALTESE SAILOR. 

(Reclining and shaking his cap.) 

It 's the waves the snow's caps turn to jig it now. 
They '11 shake their tassels soon. Now would all the 
waves were women, then I 'd go drown, and chassee with 
them evermore ! There 's naught so sweet on earth 
heaven may not match it ! as those swift glances of 
warm, wild bosoms in the dance, when the over-arbour- 
ing arms hide such ripe, bursting grapes. 

SICILIAN SAILOE. 

(Reclining.) 

Tell me not of it ! Hark ye, lad fleet interfacings of 
the limbs lithe swayings covings flutterings ! lip ! 
heart ! hip ! all graze : unceasing touch and go ! not 
taste, observe ye, else come satiety. Eh, Pagan ? 
(Nudging.) 

TAHITIAN SAILOR. 

(Reclining on a mat.) 

Hail, holy nakedness of our dancing girls ! the Heeva- 
Heeva ! Ah ! low-veiled, high-palmed Tahiti ! I still 
rest me on thy mat, but the soft soil has slid ! I saw 
thee woven in the wood, my mat ! green the first day I 
brought ye thence ; now worn and wilted quite. Ah me ! 
not thou nor I can bear the change ! How then, if so 
be transplanted to yon sky ? Hear I the roaring streams 
from Pirohitee's peak of spears, when they leap down the 
crags and drown the villages ? The blast ! the blast ! 
Up, spine, and meet it ! (Leaps to his feet.) 






MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE 219 

PORTUGUESE SAILOR. 

How the sea rolls swashing 'gainst the side ! Stand 
by for reefing, hearties ! the winds are just crossing 
swords, pell-mell they '11 go lunging presently. 

DANISH SAILOR. 

Crack, crack, old ship ! so long as thou crackest, thou 
boldest ! Well done ! The mate there holds ye to it 
stiffly. He 's no more afraid than the isle fort at Cattegat, 
put there to fight the Baltic with storm-lashed guns, on 
which the sea-salt cakes ! 

4TH NANTUCKET SAILOR. 

He has his orders, mind ye that. I heard old Ahab 
tell him he must always kill a squall, something as they 
burst a waterspout with a pistol fire your ship right 
into it ! 

ENGLISH SAILOR. 

Blood ! but that old man 's a grand old cove ! We are 
the lads to hunt him up his whale ! 

ALL. 
Ay ! ay ! 

OLD MANX SAILOR. 

How the three pines shake ! Pines are the hardest sort 
of tree to live when shifted to any other soil, and here 
there 's none but the crew's cursed clay. Steady, helms- 
man ! steady. This is the sort of weather when brave 
hearts snap ashore, and keeled hulls split at sea. Our 
captain has his birth-mark ; look yonder, boys, there 's 
another in the sky lurid-like, ye see, all else pitch black. 

DAGGOO. 

What of that ? Who 's afraid of black 's afraid of me ! 
I 'm quarried out of it ! 



220 MOBY-DICK 

SPANISH SAILOR. 

(Aside.) He wants to bully, ah ! the old grudge 
makes me touchy. (Advancing.) Ay, harpooneer, thy 
race is the undeniable dark side of mankind devilish 
dark at that. No offence. 

DAGGOO (grimly). 
None. 

ST. JAGO'S SAILOR. 

That Spaniard 's mad or drunk. But that can't be, 
or else in his one case our old Mogul's fire-waters are 
somewhat long in working. 

5TH NANTUCKET SAILOR. 

What 's that I saw lightning ? Yes. 

SPANISH SAILOR. 

No ; Daggoo showing his teeth. 

DAGGOO (springing). 
Swallow thine, manikin ! White skin, white liver ! 

SPANISH SAILOR (meeting him). 
Knife thee heartily ! big frame, small spirit ! 

ALL. 
A row ! a row ! a row ! 

TASHTEGO (with a whiff). 

A row alow, and a row aloft Gods and men both 
brawlers ! Humph ! 

BELFAST SAILOR. 

A row ! arrah a row ! The Virgin be blessed, a row ! 
Plunge in with ye ! 



MIDNIGHT, FORECASTLE 221 



ENGLISH SAILOR. 



Fair play ! Snatch the Spaniard's knife ! A ring, a 



ring ! 



OLD MANX SAILOR. 



Ready formed. There ! the ringed horizon. In that 
ring Cain struck Abel. Sweet work, right work ! No ? 
Why then, God, mad'st thou the ring ? 

MATE'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK. 

Hands by the halyards ! in top-gallant-sails ! Stand 
by to reef topsails ! 

ALL. 

The squall ! the squall ! jump, my jollies ! (They 
scatter.) 

PIP (shrinking under the windlass). 

Jollies ? Lord help such jollies ! Crish, crash ! there 
goes the jib-stay ! Blang-whang ! God ! Duck lower, 
Pip, here comes the royal yard ! It 's worse than being 
in the whirled woods, the last day of the year ! Who 'd 
go climbing after chestnuts now ? But there they go, 
all cursing, and here I don't. Fine prospects to 'em ; 
they 're on the road to heaven. Hold on hard ! Jimmini, 
what a squall ! But those chaps there are worse yet 
they are your white squalls, they. White squalls ? white 
whale, shirr ! shirr ! Here have I heard all their chat 
just now, and the White Whale shirr ! shirr ! but 
spoken of once ! and only this evening it makes me 
jingle all over like my tambourine that anaconda of 
an old man swore 'em in to hunt him ! Oh, thou big 
white God aloft there somewhere in yon darkness, have 
mercy on this small black boy down here ; preserve him 

from all men that have no bowels to feel fear ! 

******* 



CHAPTER XLI 

MOBY-DICK 

I, ISHMAEL, was one of that crew ; my shouts had gone 
up with the rest ; my oath had been welded with theirs ; 
and stronger I shouted, and more did I hammer and clinch 
my oath, because of the dread in my soul. A wild, 
mystical, sympathetical feeling was in me ; Ahab's 
quenchless feud seemed mine. With greedy ears I 
learned the history of that murderous monster against 
whom I and all the others had taken our oaths of violence 
and revenge. 

For some time past, though at intervals only, the un- 
accompanied, secluded White Whale had haunted those 
uncivilised seas mostly frequented by the sperm whale 
fishermen. But not all of them knew of his existence ; 
only a few of them, comparatively, had knowingly seen 
him ; while the number who as yet had actually and 
knowingly given battle to him, was small indeed. For, 
owing to the large number of whale-cruisers ; the dis- 
orderly way they were sprinkled over the entire watery 
circumference, many of them adventurously pushing 
their quest along solitary latitudes, so as seldom or never 
for a whole twelvemonth or more on a stretch, to en- 
counter a single news-telling sail of any sort ; the inordin- 
ate length of each separate voyage ; the irregularity of the 
times of sailing from home ; all these, with other circum- 
stances, direct and indirect, long obstructed the spread 
through the whole world- wide whaling-fleet of the special 
individualising tidings concerning Moby-Dick. It was 

222 



MOBY-DICK 223 

hardly to be doubted, that several vessels reported to have 
encountered, at such or such a time, or on such or such a 
meridian, a sperm whale of uncommon magnitude and 
malignity, which whale, after doing great mischief to his 
assailants, had completely escaped them ; to some minds 
it was not an* unfair presumption, I say, that the whale 
in question must have been no other than Moby-Dick. 
Yet as of late the sperm whale fishery had been marked 
by various and not unfrequent instances of great ferocity, 
cunning, and malice in the monster attacked ; therefore 
it was, that those who by accident ignorantly gave battle 
to Moby-Dick ; such hunters, perhaps, for the most part, 
were content to ascribe the peculiar terror he bred, more, 
as it were, to the perils of the sperm whale fishery at 
large, than to the individual cause. In that way, mostly, 
the disastrous encounter between Ahab and the whale 
had hitherto been popularly regarded. 

And as for those who, previously hearing of the White 
Whale, by chance caught sight of him ; in the beginning 
of the thing they had every one of them, almost, as boldly 
and fearlessly lowered for him, as for any other whale of 
that species. But at length, such calamities did ensue 
in these assaults not restricted to sprained wrists and 
ankles, broken limbs, or devouring amputations but 
fatal to the last degree of fatality ; those repeated disas- 
trous repulses, all accumulating and piling their terrors 
upon Moby -Dick ; those things had gone far to shake the 
fortitude of many brave hunters, to whom the story of 
the White Whale had eventually come. 

Nor did wild rumours of all sorts fail to exaggerate, and 
still the more horrify the true histories of these deadly 
encounters. For not only do fabulous rumours naturally 
grow out of the very body of all surprising terrible events, 
as the smitten tree gives birth to its fungi ; but, in 
maritime life, far more than in that of terra-firma, wild 



224 MOBY-DICK 

rumours abound, wherever there is any adequate reality 
for them to cling to. And as the sea surpasses the land 
in this matter, so the whale-fishery surpasses every other 
sort of maritime life, in the wonderfulness and fearful- 
ness of the rumours which sometimes circulate there. 
For not only are whalemen as a body unexempt from that 
ignorance and superstitiousness hereditary to all sailors ; 
but of all sailors, they are by all odds the most directly 
brought into contact with whatever is appallingly astonish- 
ing in the sea ; face to face they not only eye its greatest 
marvels, but, hand to jaw, give battle to them. Alone, 
in such remotest waters, that though you sailed a thousand 
miles, and passed a thousand shores, you would not come 
to any chiselled hearthstone, or aught hospitable beneath 
that part of the sun ; in such latitudes and longitudes, 
pursuing too such a calling as he does, the whaleman is 
wrapped by influences all tending to make his fancy 
pregnant with many a mighty birth. 

No wonder, then, that ever gathering volume from the 
mere transit over the wildest watery spaces, the outblown 
rumours of the White Whale did in the end incorporate 
with themselves all manner of morbid hints, and half- 
formed foetal suggestions of supernatural agencies, which 
eventually invested Moby-Dick with new terrors un- 
borrowed from anything that visibly appears. So that in 
many cases such a panic did he finally strike, that few 
who by those rumours, at least, had heard of the White 
Whale, few of those hunters were willing to encounter the 
perils of his jaw. 

But there were still other and more vital practical 
influences at work. Not even at the present day has the 
original prestige of the sperm whale, as fearfully dis- 
tinguished from all other species of the leviathan, died out 
of the minds of the whalemen as a body. There are those 
this day among them, who, though intelligent and cour- 



MOBY-DICK 225 

ageous enough in offering battle to the Greenland or right 
whale, would perhaps, either from professional inexperi- 
ence, or incompetency, or timidity, decline a contest with 
the sperm whale ; at any rate, there are plenty of whale- 
men, especially among those whaling nations not sailing 
under the American flag, who have never hostilely en- 
countered the sperm whale, but whose sole knowledge 
of the leviathan is restricted to the ignoble monster 
primitively pursued in the North ; seated on their 
hatches, these men will hearken with a childish fireside 
interest and awe, to the wild, strange tales of Southern 
whaling. Nor is the pre-eminent tremendousness of the 
great sperm whale anywhere more feelingly compre- 
hended, than on board of those prows which stem him. 

And as if the now tested reality of his might had in 
former legendary times thrown its shadow before it ; we 
find some book naturalists Olassen and Povelson 
declaring the sperm whale not only to be a consternation 
to every other creature in the sea, but also to be so in- 
credibly ferocious as continually to be athirst for human \ 
blood. Nor even down to so late a time as Cuvier's, were 
these or almost similar impressions effaced. For in his 
Natural History, the Baron himself affirms that at 
sight of the sperm whale, all fish (sharks included) are 
'struck with the most lively terrors,' and 'often in the 
precipitancy of their flight dash themselves against the 
rocks with such violence as to cause instantaneous death.' 
And however the general experiences in the fishery may 
amend such reports as these ; yet in their full terribleness, 
even to the bloodthirsty item of Povelson, the super- 
stitious belief in them is, in some vicissitudes of their 
vocation, revived in the minds of the hunters. 

So that overawed by the rumours and portents concern- 
ing him, not a few of the fishermen recalled, in reference 
to Moby-Dick, the earlier days of the sperm whale fishery, 

VOL. i. p 



226 MOBY-DICK 

when it was oftentimes hard to induce long -practised right 
whalemen to embark in the perils of this new and daring 
warfare ; such men protesting that although other 
leviathans might be hopefully pursued, yet to chase and 
point lance at such an apparition as the sperm whale was 
not for mortal man. That to attempt it, would be inevit- 
ably to be torn into a quick eternity. On this head, 
there are some remarkable documents that may be 
consulted. 

Nevertheless, some there were, who even in the face of 
these things were ready to give chase to Moby-Dick ; and 
a still greater number who, chancing only to hear of him 
distantly and vaguely, without the specific details of any 
certain calamity, and without superstitious accompani- 
ments, were sufficiently hardy not to flee from the battle 
if offered. 

One of the wild suggestings referred to, as at last coming 
to be linked with the White Whale in the minds of the 
superstitiously inclined, was the unearthly conceit that 
Moby-Dick was ubiquitous ; that he had actually been 
encountered in opposite latitudes at one and the same 
instant of time. 

Nor, credulous as such minds must have been, was 
this conceit altogether without some faint show of super- 
stitious probability. For as the secrets of the currents 
in the seas have never yet been divulged, even to the 
most erudite research ; so the hidden ways of the sperm 
whale when beneath the surface remain, in great part, 
unaccountable to his pursuers ; and from time to time 
have originated the most curious and contradictory specu- 
lations regarding them, especially concerning the mystic 
modes whereby, after sounding to a great depth, he trans- 
ports himself with such vast swiftness to the most widely 
distant points. 

It is a thing well known to both American and English 



MOBY-DICK 227 

whale-ships, and as well a thing placed upon authoritative 
record years ago by Scoresby, that some whales have been 
captured far north in the Pacific, in whose bodies have been 
found the barbs of harpoons darted in the Greenland seas. 
Nor is it to be gainsaid, that in some of these instances it 
has been declared that the interval of time between the 
two assaults could not have exceeded very many days. 
Hence, by inference, it has been believed by some whale- 
men, that the Nor'- West Passage, so long a problem to 
man, was never a problem to the whale. So that here, 
in the real living experience of living men, the prodigies 
related in old times of the inland Strello mountain in 
Portugal (near whose top there was said to be a lake in 
which the wrecks of ships floated up to the surface) ; 
and that still more wonderful story of the Arethusa 
fountain near Syracuse (whose waters were believed to 
have come from the Holy Land by an underground 
passage) ; these fabulous narrations are almost fully 
equalled by the realities of the whaleman. 

Forced into familiarity, then, with such prodigies as 
these ; and knowing that after repeated, intrepid assaults, 
the White Whale had escaped alive ; it cannot be much 
matter of surprise that some whalemen should go still 
further in their superstitions ; declaring Moby-Dick not 
only ubiquitous, but immortal (for immortality is but 
ubiquity in time) ; that though groves of spears should 
be planted in his flanks, he would still swim away un- 
harmed ; or if indeed he should ever be made to spout 
thick blood, such a sight would be but a ghastly decep- 
tion ; for again in unensanguined billows hundreds of 
leagues away, his unsullied jet would once more be seen. 

But even stripped of these supernatural surmisings, 
there was enough in the earthly make and incontestable 
character of the monster to strike the imagination with 
unwonted power. For, it was not so much his uncommon 



228 MOBY-DICK 

bulk that so much distinguished him from other sperm 
whales, but, as was elsewhere thrown out a peculiar 
snow-white wrinkled forehead, and a high, pyramidical 
white hump. These were his prominent features ; the 
tokens whereby, even hi the limitless, uncharted seas, 
he revealed his identity, at a long distance, to those who 
knew him. 

The rest of his body was so streaked, and spotted, and 
marbled with the same shrouded hue, that, in the end, 
he had gained his distinctive appellation of the White 
Whale ; a name, indeed, literally justified by his vivid 
aspect, when seen gliding at high noon through a dark 
blue sea, leaving a milky-way wake of creamy foam, all 
spangled with golden gleamings. 

Nor was it his unwonted magnitude, nor his remarkable 
hue, nor yet his deformed lower jaw, that so much in- 
vested the whale with natural terror, as that unexampled, 
intelligent malignity which, according to specific accounts, 
he had over and over again evinced in his assaults. More 
than all, his treacherous retreats struck more of dismay 
than perhaps aught else. For, when swimming before 
his exulting pursuers, with every apparent symptom of 
alarm, he had several times been known to turn round 
suddenly, and, bearing down upon them, either stave 
their boats to splinters, or drive them back in consterna- 
tion to their ship. 

Already several fatalities had attended his chase. 
But though similar disasters, however little bruited 
ashore, were by no means unusual in the fishery ; yet, in 
most instances, such seemed the White Whale's infernal 
aforethought of ferocity, that every dismembering or 
death that he caused, was not wholly regarded as having 
been inflicted by an unintelligent agent. 

Judge, then, to what pitches of inflamed, distracted 
fury the minds of his more desperate hunters were im- 



MOBY-DICK 229 

pelled, when amid the chips of chewed boats, and the 
sinking limbs of torn comrades, they swam out of the 
white curds of the whale's direful wrath into the serene, 
exasperating sunlight, that smiled on, as if at a birth or 
a bridal. 

His three boats stove around him, and oars and men 
both whirling in the eddies, one captain, seizing the line- 
knife from his broken prow, had dashed at the whale, 
as an Arkansas duellist at his foe, blindly seeking with a 
six-inch blade to reach the fathom-deep life of the whale. 
That captain was Ahab. And then it was, that suddenly 
sweeping his sickle -shaped lower jaw beneath him, Moby- 
Dick had reaped away Ahab's leg, as a mower a blade of 
grass in the field. No turbaned Turk, no hired Venetian 
or Malay, could have smote him with more seeming 
malice. Small reason was there to doubt, then, that ever 
since that almost fatal encounter, Ahab had cherished a 
wild vindictiveness against the whale, all the more fell 
for that in his frantic morbidness he at last came to 
identify with him, not only all his bodily woes, but all 
his intellectual and spiritual exasperations. The White 
Whale swam before him as the monomaniac incarnation 
of all those malicious agencies which some deep men 
feel eating in them, till they are left living on with half 
a heart and half a lung. That intangible malignity which 
has been from the beginning ; to whose dominion even 
the modern Christians ascribe one-half of the worlds ; 
which the ancient Ophites of the East reverenced in their 
statue devil ; Ahab did not fall down and worship it 
like them ; but deliriously transferring its idea to the 
abhorred White Whale, he pitted himself, all mutilated, 
against it. All that most maddens and torments ; all 
that stirs up the lees of things ; all truth with malice in 
it ; all that cracks the sinews and cakes the brain ; all 
the subtle demonisms of life and thought ; all evil, to 



230 MOBY-DICK 

crazy Ahab, were visibly personified, and made practically 
assailable in Moby-Dick. He piled upon the whale's 
white hump the sum of all the general rage and hate felt 
by his whole race from Adam down ; and then, as if his 
chest had been a mortar, he burst his hot heart's shell 
upon it. 

It is not probable that this monomania in him took its 
instant rise at the precise time of his bodily dismember- 
ment. Then, in darting at the monster, knife in hand, 
he had but given loose to a sudden, passionate, corporal 
animosity ; and when he received the stroke that tore 
him, he probably but felt the agonising bodily laceration, 
but nothing more. Yet, when by this collision forced to 
turn toward home, and for long months of days and weeks, 
Ahab and anguish lay stretched together in one ham- 
mock, rounding in mid- winter that dreary, howling Pata- 
gonian Cape ; then it was, that his torn body and gashed 
soul bled into one another ; and so interfusing, made him 
mad. That it was only then, on the homeward voyage, 
after the encounter, that the final monomania seized him, 
seems all but certain from the fact that, at intervals during 
the passage, he was a raving lunatic ; and, though un- 
limbed of a leg, yet such vital strength yet lurked in his 
Egyptian chest, and was moreover intensified by his 
delirium, that his mates were forced to lace him fast, 
even there, as he sailed, raving in his hammock. In a 
strait -jacket, he swung to the mad rockings of the gales. 
And, when running into more sufferable latitudes, the 
ship, with mild stun '-sails spread, floated across the 
tranquil tropics, and, to all appearances, the old man's 
delirium seemed left behind him with the Cape Horn 
swells, and he came forth from his dark den into the blessed 
light and air ; even then, when he bore that firm, collected 
front, however pale, and issued his calm orders once again ; 
and his mates thanked God the direful madness was now 



MOBY-DICK 231 

gone ; even then, Ahab, in his hidden self, raved on. 
Human madness is oftentimes a cunning and most feline 
thing. When you think it fled, it may have but become 
transfigured into some still subtler form. Ahab's full 
lunacy subsided not, but deepeningly contracted ; like 
the unabated Hudson, when that noble Northman flows 
narrowly, but unfathomably through the Highland gorge. 
But, as in his narrow-flowing monomania, not one jot 
of Ahab's broad madness had been left behind ; so in 
that broad madness, not one jot of his great natural 
intellect had perished. That before living agent, now 
became the living instrument. If such a furious trope 
may stand, his special lunacy stormed his general sanity, 
and carried it, and turned all its concentrated cannon 
upon its own mad mark ; so that far from having lost 
his strength, Ahab, to that one end, did now possess a 
thousand-fold more potency than ever he had sanely 
brought to bear upon any one reasonable object. 

This is much ; yet Ahab's larger, darker, deeper part 
remains unhinted. But vain to popularise profundities, 
and all truth is profound. Winding far down from within 
the very heart of this spiked Hotel de Cluny where we 
here stand however grand and wonderful, now quit it ; 
and take your way, ye nobler, sadder souls, to those vast 
Roman halls of Thermes ; where far beneath the fantastic 
towers of man's upper earth, his root of grandeur, his 
whole awful essence sits in bearded state ; an antique 
buried beneath antiquities, and throned on torsoes ! 
So with a broken throne, the great gods mock that captive 
king ; so like a Caryatid, he patient sits, upholding on 
his frozen brow the piled entablatures of ages. Wind ye 
down there, ye prouder, sadder souls ! question that 
proud, sad king ! A family likeness ! ay, he did beget 
ye> ye young exiled royalties ; and from your grim sire 
only will the old State -secret come. 



232 MOBY-DICK 

Now, in his heart, Ahab had some glimpse of this, 
namely : all my means are sane, my motive and my object 
mad. Yet without power to kill, or change, or shun the 
fact, he likewise knew that to mankind he did long dis- 
. semble ; in some sort, did still. But that thing of his 
dissembling was only subject to his perceptibility, not 
to his will determinate. Nevertheless, so well did he 
succeed in that dissembling, that when with ivory leg 
he stepped ashore at last, no Nantucketer thought him 
otherwise than but naturally grieved, and that to the 
quick, with the terrible casualty which had overtaken 
him. 

The report of his undeniable delirium at sea was like- 
wise popularly ascribed to a kindred cause. And so too, 
all the added moodiness which always afterward, to the 
very day of sailing in the Pequod on the present voyage, 
sat brooding on his brow. Nor is it so very unlikely, 
that far from distrusting his fitness for another whaling 
voyage, on account of such dark symptoms, the calculating 
people of that prudent isle were inclined to harbour the 
conceit, that for those very reasons he was all the better 
qualified and set on edge, for a pursuit so full of rage and 
wildness as the bloody hunt of whales. Gnawed within 
and scorched without, with the unfixed, unrelenting fangs 
of some incurable idea ; such an one, could he be found, 
would seem the very man to dart his iron and lift his 
lance against the most appalling of all brutes. Or, if for 
any reason thought to be corporeally incapacitated for 
that, yet such an one would seem superlatively competent 
to cheer and howl on his underlings to the attack. But 
be all this as it may, certain it is, that with the mad 
secret of his unabated rage bolted up and keyed in him, 
Ahab had purposely sailed upon the present voyage with 
the one only and all-engrossing object of hunting the White 
Whale. Had any one of his old acquaintances on shore 



MOBY-DICK 233 

but half dreamed of what was lurking in him then, how 
soon would their aghast and righteous souls have wrenched 
the ship from such a fiendish man ! They were bent 
on profitable cruises, the profit to be counted down in 
dollars from the mint. He was intent on an audacious, 
immitigable, and supernatural revenge. 

Here, then, was this gray-headed, ungodly old man, 
chasing with curses a Job's whale round the world, at the 
head of a crew, too, chiefly made up of mongrel renegades, 
and castaways, and cannibals morally enfeebled, also, 
by the incompetence of mere unaided virtue or right- 
mindedness mStarbuck, the invulnerable jollity of indiffer- 
ence and recklessness in Stubb, and the pervading medioc- 
rity in Flask. Such a crew, so officered, seemed specially 
picked and packed by some infernal fatality to help Mm 
to his monomaniac revenge. How it was that they so 
aboundingly responded to the old man's ire by what 
evil magic their souls were possessed, that at times his 
hate seemed almost theirs ; the White Whale as much 
their insufferable foe as his ; how all this came to be- 
what the White Whale was to them, or how to their 
unconscious understandings, also, in some dim, unsus- 
pected way, he might have seemed the gliding great demon 
of the seas of life, all this to explain, would be to dive 
deeper than Ishmael can go. The subterranean miner 
that works in us all, how can one tell whither leads his 
shaft by the ever shifting, muffled sound of his pick ? 
Who does not feel the irresistible arm drag ? What skiff 
in tow of a seventy-four can stand still ? For one, I gave 
myself up to the abandonment of the time and the place ; 
but while yet all a-rush to encounter the whale, could see 
naught in that brute but the deadliest ill. 



CHAPTER XLII 

THE WHITENESS OF THE WHALE 

WHAT the White Whale was to Ahab has been hinted ; 
what, at times, he was to me, as yet remains unsaid. 

Aside from those more obvious considerations touching 
Moby-Dick, which could not but occasionally awaken in 
any man's soul some alarm, there was another thought, 
or rather vague, nameless horror concerning him, which 
at times by its intensity completely overpowered all the 
rest ; and yet so mystical and well-nigh ineffable was it, 
that I almost despair of putting it in a comprehensible 
form. It was the whiteness of the whale that above all 
things appalled me. But how can I hope to explain 
myself here ; and yet, in some dim, random way, explain 
myself I must, else all these chapters might be naught. 

Though in many natural objects, whiteness refiningly 
enhances beauty, as if imparting some special virtue of 
its own, as in marbles, japonicas, and pearls ; and though 
various nations have in some way recognised a certain 
royal pre-eminence in this hue ; even the barbaric, grand 
old kings of Pegu placing the title ' Lord of the White 
Elephants ' above all their other magniloquent ascrip- 
tions of dominion ; and the modern kings of Siam un- 
furling the same snow-white quadruped in the royal 
standard ; and the Hanoverian flag bearing the one figure 
of a snow-white charger ; and the great Austrian Empire, 
Caesarian, heir to overlording Rome, having for the 
imperial colour the same imperial hue ; and though this 
pre-eminence in it applies to the human race itself, giving 

234 



THE WHITENESS OF THE WHALE 235 

the white man ideal mastership over every dusky tribe ; 
and though, besides all this, whiteness has been even 
made significant of gladness, for among the Romans a 
white stone marked a joyful day ; and though in other 
mortal sympathies and symbolisings, this same hue is 
made the emblem of many touching, noble things the 
innocence of brides, the benignity of age ; though among 
the Bed Men of America the giving of the white belt of 
wampum was the deepest pledge of honour ; though in 
many climes, whiteness typifies the majesty of Justice 
in the ermine of the Judge, and contributes to the daily 
state of kings and queens drawn by milk-white steeds ; 
though even in the higher mysteries of the most august 
religions it has been made the symbol of the divine spot- 
lessness and power ; by the Persian fire -worshippers, the 
white forked flame being held the holiest on the altar ; 
and in the Greek mythologies, Great Jove himself being 
made incarnate in a snow-white bull ; and though to the 
noble Iroquois, the mid-winter sacrifice of the sacred 
White Dog was by far the holiest festival of their theology, 
that spotless, faithful creature being held the purest 
envoy they could send to the Great Spirit with the annual 
tidings of their own fidelity ; and though directly from 
the Latin word for white, all Christian priests derive the 
name of one part of their sacred vesture, the alb or tunic, 
worn beneath the cassock ; and though among the holy 
pomps of the Romish faith, white is specially employed 
in the celebration of the Passion of our Lord ; though 
in the Vision of St. John, white robes are given to the 
redeemed, and the four-and-twenty elders stand clothed 
in white before the great white throne, and the Holy 
One that sitteth there white like wool ; yet for all these 
accumulated associations, with whatever is sweet, and 
honourable, and sublime, there yet lurks an elusive some- 
thing in the innermost idea of this hue, which strikes more 



~ 



236 MOBY-DICK 

of panic to the soul than that redness which affrights in 
blood. 

This elusive quality it is, which causes the thought of 
whiteness, when divorced from more kindly associations, 
and coupled with any object terrible in itself, to heighten 
that terror to the furthest bounds. Witness the white 
bear of the Poles, and the white shark of the Tropics ; 
what but their smooth, flaky whiteness makes them the 
transcendent horrors they are ? That ghastly whiteness 
it is which imparts such an abhorrent mildness, even more 
loathsome than terrific, to the dumb gloating of their 
aspect. So that not the fierce-fanged tiger in his heraldic 
coat can so stagger courage as the white-shrouded bear 
or shark. 1 

Bethink thee of the albatross, whence come those 
clouds of spiritual wonderment and pale dread, in which 
that white phantom sails in all imaginations ? Not 
Coleridge first threw that spell ; but God's great, unflatter- 
ing laureate, Nature. 2 

1 With reference to the Polar bear, it may possibly be urged by him 
who would fain go still deeper into this matter, that it is not the white- 
ness, separately regarded, which heightens the intolerable hideousness of 
that brute ; for, analysed, that heightened hideousness, it might be said, 
only arises from the circumstance, that the irresponsible ferociousness of 
the creature stands invested in the fleece of celestial innocence and love : 
and hence, by bringing together two such opposite emotions in our minds, 
the Polar bear frightens us with so unnatural a contrast. But even 
assuming all this to be true ; yet, were it not for the whiteness, you 
would not have that intensified terror. 

As for the white shark, the white gliding ghostliness of repose in that 
creature, when beheld in his ordinary moods, strangely tallies with the 
same quality in the Polar quadruped. This peculiarity is most vividly 
hit by the French in the name they bestow upon that fish. The Romish 
mass for the dead begins with * Requiem eternam ' (eternal rest), whence 
Requiem denominating the mass itself, and any other funereal music. 
Now, in allusion to the white, silent stillness of death in this shark, and 
the mild deadliness of his habits, the French call him Requin. 

2 I remember the first albatross I ever saw. It was during a prolonged 
gale, in waters hard upon the Antarctic seas. From my forenoon watch 
below, I ascended to the overclouded deck ; and there, dashed upon the 
main hatches, I saw a regal, feathery thing of unspotted whiteness, and 
with a hooked, Roman bill sublime. At intervals, it arched forth its vast 



THE WHITENESS OF THE WHALE 237 

Most famous in our Western annals and Indian tradi- 
tions is that of the White Steed of the Prairies ; a 
magnificent milk-white charger, large -eyed, small-headed, 
bluff-chested, and with the dignity of a thousand monarchs 
in his lofty, over-scorning carriage. He was the elected 
Xerxes of vast herds of wild horses, whose pastures in 
those days were only fenced by the Rocky Mountains 
and the Alleghanies. At their flaming head he westward 
trooped it like that chosen star which every evening leads 
on the hosts of light. The flashing cascade of his mane, 
the curving comet of his tail, invested him with housings 
more resplendent than gold and silver beaters could have 
furnished him. A most imperial and archangelical appari- 
tion of that unf alien, Western world, which to the eyes of 



archangel wings, as if to embrace some holy ark. Wondrous flutterings 
and throbbings shook it. Though bodily unharmed, it uttered cries, as 
some king's ghost in supernatural distress. Through its inexpressible, 
strange eyes, methought I peeped to secrets which took hold of God. As 



strange eyes, metnougnt l peeped to secrets wnicn toofc hold 01 l*od. As I 
Abraham before the angels, I bowed myself ; the white thing was so white, 1 
its wings so wide, and in those forever exiled waters, I had lost the * 
miserable warping memories of traditions and of towns. Long I gazed at 
that prodigy of plumage. I cannot tell, can only hint, the things that 
darted through me then. But at last I awoke ; and turning, asked a 
sailor what bird was this. A goney, he replied. Goney ! I never had 
heard that name before ; is it conceivable that this glorious thing ia 
utterly unknown to men ashore ! never ! But some time after, I learned 
that goney was some seaman's name for albatross. So that by no possi- 
bility could Coleridge's wild Rhyme have had aught to do with those 
mystical impressions which were mine, when I saw that bird upon our 
deck. For neither had I then read the Rhyme, nor knew the bird to be 
an albatross. Yet, in saying this, I do but indirectly burnish a little 
brighter the noble merit of the poem and the poet. 

I assert, then, that in the wondrous bodily whiteness of the bird chiefly 
lurks the secret of the spell ; a truth the more evinced in this, that by a 
solecism of terms there are birds called gray albatrosses ; and these I have 
frequently seen, but never with such emotions as when I beheld the 
Antarctic fowl. 

But how had the mystic thing been caught? Whisper it not, and I 
will tell ; with a treacherous hook and line, as the fowl floated on the sea. 
At last the captain made a postman of it ; tying a lettered, leathern tally 
round its neck, with the ship's time and place ; and then letting it 
escape. But I doubt not, that leathern tally, meant for man, was taken 
off in Heaven, when the white fowl flew to join the wing-folding, the 
invoking, and adoring cherubim ! 



238 MOBY-DICK 

the old trappers and hunters revived the glories of those 
primeval times when Adam walked majestic as a god, 
bluff -bo wed and fearless as this mighty steed. Whether 
marching amid his aides and marshals in the van of 
countless cohorts that endlessly streamed it over the 
plains, like an Ohio ; or whether with his circumambient 
subjects browsing all around at the horizon, the White 
Steed gallopingly reviewed them with warm nostrils 
reddening through his cool milkiness ; in whatever aspect 
he presented himself, always to the bravest Indians he 
was the object of trembling reverence and awe. Nor can 
it be questioned from what stands on legendary record 
of this noble horse, that it was his spiritual whiteness 
chiefly, which so clothed him with divineness ; and that 
this divineness had that in it which, though commanding 
worship, at the same time enforced a certain nameless 
terror. 

But there are other instances where this whiteness loses 
all that accessory and strange glory which invests it in 
the White Steed and Albatross. 

What is it that in the Albino man so peculiarly repels 
and often shocks the eye, as that sometimes he is loathed 
by his own kith and kin ! It is that whiteness which 
invests him, a thing expressed by the name he bears. 
The Albino is as well made as other men has no sub- 
stantive deformity and yet this mere aspect of all- 
pervading whiteness makes him more strangely hideous 
than the ugliest abortion. Why should this be so ? 

Nor, in quite other aspects, does Nature in her least 
palpable but not the less malicious agencies, fail to enlist 
among her forces this crowning attribute of the terrible. 
From its snowy aspect, the gauntleted ghost of the 
Southern seas has been denominated the White Squall. 
Nor, in some historic instances, has the art of human 
malice omitted so potent an auxiliary. How wildly it 



THE WHITENESS OF THE WHALE 239 

heightens the effect of that passage in Froissart, when, 
masked in the snowy symbol of their faction, the desper- 
ate White Hoods of Ghent murder their bailiff in the 
market-place ! 

Nor, in some things, does the common, hereditary 
experience of all mankind fail to bear witness to the 
supernaturalism of this hue. It cannot well be doubted, 
that the one visible quality in the aspect of the dead which 
most appals the gazer, is the marble pallor lingering there ; 
as if indeed that pallor were as much like the badge of 
consternation in the other world, as of mortal trepidation 
here. And from that pallor of the dead, we borrow the 
expressive hue of the shroud in which we wrap them. 
Nor even in our superstitions do we fail to throw the same 
snowy mantle round our phantoms ; all ghosts rising in 
a milk-white fog Yea, while these terrors seize us, let 
us add, that even the king of terrors, when personified by 
the evangelist, rides on his pallid horse. 

Therefore, in his other moods, symbolise whatever 
grand or gracious thing he will by whiteness, no man can 
deny that in its profoundest idealised significance it calls 
up a peculiar apparition to the soul. 

But though without dissent this point be fixed, how is 
mortal man to account for it ? To analyse it would 
seem impossible. Can we, then, by the citation of some 
of those instances wherein this thing of whiteness 
though for the time either wholly or in great part stripped 
of all direct associations calculated to impart to it aught 
fearful, but, nevertheless, is found to exert over us the 
same sorcery, however modified ; can we thus hope to 
light upon some chance clue to conduct us to the hidden 
cause we seek ? 

Let us try. But in a matter like this, subtlety appeals 
to subtlety, and without imagination no man can follow 
another into these halls. And though, doubtless, some at 



240 MOBY-DICK 

least of the imaginative impressions about to be presented 
may have been shared by most men, yet few perhaps were 
entirely conscious of them at the time, and therefore may 
not be able to recall them now. 

Why to the man of untutored ideality, who happens to 
be but loosely acquainted with the peculiar character of 
the day, does the bare mention of Whitsuntide marshal 
in the fancy such long, dreary, speechless processions of 
slow-pacing pilgrims downcast and hooded with new- 
fallen snow ? Or, to the unread, unsophisticated Protes- 
tant of the Middle American States, why does the passing 
mention of a White Friar or a White Nun, evoke such an 
eyeless statue in the soul ? 

Or what is there apart from the traditions of dungeoned 
warriors and kings (which will not wholly account for it) 
that makes the White Tower of London tell so much more 
strongly on the imagination of an untravelled American 
than those other storied structures, its neighbours the 
Byward Tower, or even the Bloody ? And those sub- 
limer towers, the White Mountains of New Hampshire, 
whence, in peculiar moods, comes that gigantic ghostli- 
ness over the soul at the bare mention of that name, while 
the thought of Virginia's Blue Ridge is full of a soft, dewy, 
distant dreaminess ? Or *why, irrespective of all latitudes 
and longitudes, does thg name of the White Sea exert 
such a spectralness over the fancy, while that of the 
Yellow Sea lulls us with mortal thoughts of long lacquered 
mild afternoons on the waves, followed by the gaudiest 
and yet sleepiest of sunsets ? Or, to choose a wholly un- 
substantial instance, purely addressed to the fancy, why, 
in reading the old fairy tales of Central Europe, does ' the 
tall pale man ' of the Hartz forests, whose changeless 
pallor unrustlingly glides through the green of the groves 
why is this phantom more terrible than all the whooping 
imps of the Blocksburg ? 



THE WHITENESS OF THE WHALE 241 

Nor is it, altogether, the remembrance of her cathedral- 
toppling earthquakes ; nor the stampedoes of her frantic 
seas ; nor the tearlessness of arid skies that never rain ; 
nor the sight of her wide field of leaning spires, wrenched 
cope-stones, and crosses all adroop (like canted yards of 
anchored fleets) ; and her suburban avenues of house- 
walls lying over upon each other, as a tossed pack of 
cards ; it is not these things alone which make tearless 
Lima the strangest, saddest city thou canst see. For 
Lima has taken the white veil ; and there is a higher 
horror in this whiteness of her woe. Old as Pizarro, 
this whiteness keeps her ruins forever new ; admits not 
the cheerful greenness of complete decay ; spreads over 
her broken ramparts the rigid pallor of an apoplexy that 
fixes its own distortions. 

I know that, to the common apprehension, this phe- 
nomenon of whiteness is not confessed to be the prime 
agent in exaggerating the terror of objects otherwise 
terrible ; nor to the unimaginative mind is there aught 
of terror in those appearances whose awfulness to another 
mind almost solely consists in this one phenomenon, 
especially when exhibited under any form at all approach- 
ing to muteness or universality. What I mean by these 
two statements may perhaps be respectively elucidated 
by the following examples. 

First : The mariner, when drawing nigh the coasts of 
foreign lands, if by night he hear the roar of breakers, 
starts to vigilance, and feels just enough of trepidation to 
sharpen all his faculties ; but under precisely similar 
circumstances, let him be called from his hammock to 
view his ship sailing through a midnight sea of milky 
whiteness as if from encircling headlands shoals of 
combed white bears were swimming round him then he 
feels a silent, superstitious dread ; the shrouded phantom 
of the whitened waters is horrible to him as a real ghost ; 

VOL. I. Q 



242 MOBY-DICK 

in vain the lead assures him he is still off soundings ; heart 
and helm they both go down ; he never rests till blue 
water is under him again. Yet where is the mariner who 
will tell thee, ' Sir, it was not so much the fear of striking 
hidden rocks, as the fear of that hideous whiteness that 
so stirred me ' ? 

Second : To the native Indian of Peru, the continual 
sight of the snow-howdahed Andes conveys naught of 
dread, except, perhaps, in the mere fancying of the eternal 
frosted desolateness reigning at such vast altitudes, and 
the natural conceit of what a fearfulness it would be to 
lose oneself in such inhuman solitudes. Much the same 
is it with the backwoodsman of the West, who with com- 
parative indifference views an unbounded prairie sheeted 
with driven snow, no shadow of tree or twig to break the 
fixed trance of whiteness. Not so the sailor, beholding 
the scenery of the Antarctic seas ; where at times, by 
some infernal trick of legerdemain in the powers of frost 
and air, he, shivering and half shipwrecked, instead of 
rainbows speaking hope and solace to his misery, views 
what seems a boundless churchyard grinning upon him 
with its lean ice monuments and splintered crosses. 

But thou sayest, methinks this white -lead chapter 
about whiteness is but a white flag hung out from a craven 
soul ; thou surrenderest to a hypo, Ishmael. 

Tell me, why this strong young colt, foaled in some 
peaceful valley of Vermont, far removed from all beasts 
of prey why is it that upon the sunniest day, if you but 
shake a fresh buffalo robe behind him, so that he cannot 
even see it, but only smells its wild animal muskiness 
why will he start, snort, and with bursting eyes paw the 
ground in frenzies of affright ? There is no remem- 
brance in him of any gorings of wild creatures in his green 
northern home, so that the strange muskiness he smells 
cannot recall to him anything associated with the experi- 






THE WHITENESS OP THE WHALE 243 

ence of former perils ; for what knows he, this New 
England colt, of the black bisons of distant Oregon ? 

No : but here thou beholdest even in a dumb brute, I.J^A 
the instinct of the knowledge of the demonismjin the /* / 
world. Though thousands of miles from Oregon, still 
when he smells that savage musk, the rending, goring 
bison herds are as present as to the deserted wild foal of 
the prairies, which this instant they may be trampling 
into dust. 

Thus, then, the muffled rollings of a milky sea ; the 
bleak rustlings of the festooned frosts of mountains ; the 
desolate shiftings of the windrowed snows of prairies ; 
all these, to Ishmael, are as the shaking of that buffalo 
robe to the frightened colt ! 

Though neither knows where lie the nameless things of 
which the mystic sign gives forth such hints ; yet with s 
me, as with the colt, somewhere those things must exist. 
Though in many of its aspects this visible world seems 
formed in love, the invisible spheres were formed in fright. 

But not yet have we solved the incantation of this 
whiteness, and learned why it appeals with such power to 
the soul ; and more strange and far more portentous 
why, as we have seen, it is at once the most meaning 
symbol of spiritual things, nay, the very veil of the 
Christian's Deity ; and yet should be as it is, the intensi- 
fying agent in things the most appalling to mankind. 

Is it that by its indefiniteness it shadows forth the 
heartless voids and immensities of the universe, and thus 
stabs us from behind with the thought of annihilation, 
when beholding the white depths of the Milky Way ? Or 
is it, that as in essence whiteness is not so much a colour 
as the visible ^ absence^J_c^laar^ and at the same time the 
concrete of all colours ; is it for these reasons that there 
is such a dumb blankness, full of meaning, in a wide 
landscape of snows a colourless, all-colour of atheism 



244 MOBY-DICK 

from which we shrink ? And when we consider that other 
theory of the natural philosophers, that all other earthly 
hues every stately or lovely emblazoning the sweet 
tinges of sunset skies and woods ; yea, and the gilded 
velvets of butterflies, and the butterfly cheeks of young 
girls ; all these are but subtle deceits, not actually in- 
herent in substances, but only laid on from without ; so 
that all deified Nature absolutely paints like the harlot, 
whose allurements cover nothing but the charnel-house 
within ; and when we proceed further, and consider 
that the mystical cosmetic which produces every one of 
her hues, the great principle of light, forever remains 
white or colourless in itself, and if operating without 
medium upon matter, would touch all objects, even 
tulips and roses, with its own blank tinge pondering all 
this, the palsied universe lies before us a leper ; and like 
wilful travellers in Lapland, who refuse to wear coloured 
and colouring glasses upon their eyes, so the wretched 
infidel gazes himself blind at the monumental white 
shroud that wraps all the prospect around him. And of 
all these things the Albino whale was the symbol. Wonder 
ye then at the fiery hunt ? 






CHAPTER XLIII 

HARK ! 

' HIST ! Did you hear that noise, Cabaco ? ' 

It was the middle -watch : a fair moonlight ; the 
seamen were standing in a cordon, extending from one 
of the fresh-water butts in the waist, to the scuttle-butt 
near the taffrail. In this manner, they passed the 
buckets to fill the scuttle-butt. Standing, for the most 
part, on the hallowed precincts of the quarter-deck, they 
were careful not to speak or rustle their feet. From hand 
to hand, the buckets went in the deepest silence, only 
broken by the occasional flap of a sail, and the steady hum 
of the unceasingly advancing keel. 

It was in the midst of this repose, that Archy, one of 
the cordon, whose post was near the after-hatches, 
whispered to his neighbour, a Cholo, the words above. 
' Hist ! did you hear that noise, Cabaco ? ' 
' Take the bucket, will ye, Archy ? what noise d' ye 
mean ? ' 

' There it is again under the hatches don't you hear 
it ? a cough it sounded like a cough.' 

' Cough be damned ! Pass along that return bucket.' 
' There again there it is ! it sounds like two or three 
sleepers turning over, now ! ' 

' Caramba ! have done, shipmate, will ye ? It 's the 
three soaked biscuits ye eat for supper turning over inside 
of ye -nothing else. Look to the bucket ! ' 

4 Say what ye will, shipmate ; I 've sharp ears.' 

' Ay, you are the chap, ain't ye, that heard the hum 

245 



246 MOBY-DICK 

of the old Quakeress's knitting-needles fifty miles at sea 
from Nantucket ; you 're the chap.' 

' Grin away ; we '11 see what turns up. Hark ye, 
Cabaco, there is somebody down in the after-hold that 
has not yet been seen on deck ; and I suspect our old 
Mogul knows something of it too. I heard Stubb tell 
Flask, one morning-watch, that there was something of 
that sort in the wind.' 

' Tish ! the bucket ! ' 






CHAPTER XLIV 

THE CHART 

HAD you followed Captain Ahab down into his cabin 
after the squall that took place on the night succeeding 
that wild ratification of his purpose with his crew, you 
would have seen him go to a locker in the transom, and 
bringing out a large wrinkled roll of yellowish sea-charts, 
spread them before him on his screwed-down table. Then 
seating himself before it, you would have seen him intently 
study the various lines and shadings which there met his 
eye ; and with slow but steady pencil trace additional 
courses over spaces that before were blank. At intervals, 
he would refer to piles of old log-books beside him, wherein 
were set down the seasons and places in which, on various 
former voyages of various ships, sperm whales had been 
captured or seen. 

While thus employed, the heavy pewter lamp suspended 
foi chains over his head, continually rocked with the motion 
of the ship, and forever threw shifting gleams and shadows 
of lines upon his wrinkled brow, till it almost seemed that 
while he himself was marking out lines and courses on the 
wrinkled charts, some invisible pencil was also tracing 
lines and courses upon the deeply marked chart of his 
forehead. 

But it was not this night in particular that, in the 
solitude of his cabin, Ahab thus pondered over his charts. 
Almost every night they were brought out ; almost every 
night some pencil marks were effaced, and others were 
substituted. For with the charts of all four oceans before 

247 



248 



MOBY-DICK 



him, Ahab was threading a maze of currents and eddies, 
with a view to the more certain accomplishment of that 
monomaniac thought of his soul. 

Now, to anyone not fully acquainted with the ways of 
the leviathans, it might seem an absurdly hopeless task 
thus to seek out one solitary creature in the unhooped 
oceans of this planet. But not so did it seem to Ahab, 
who knew the sets of all tides and currents ; and thereby 
calculating the drif tings of the sperm whale's food ; and, 
also, calling to mind the regular, ascertained seasons for 
hunting him in particular latitudes ; could arrive at 
reasonable surmises, almost approaching to certainties, 
concerning the timeliest day to be upon this or that 
ground in search of his prey. 

So assured, indeed, is the fact concerning the periodical- 
ness of the sperm whale's resorting to given waters, that 
many hunters believe that, could he be closely observed 
and studied throughout the world ; were the logs for one 
voyage of the entire whale -fleet carefully collated, then 
the migrations of the sperm whale would be found to 
correspond in invariability to those of the herring -shoals 
or the flights of swallows. On this hint, attempts have 
been made to construct elaborate migratory charts of the 
sperm whale. 1 

Besides, when making a passage from one feeding- 
ground to another, the sperm whales, guided by some 
infallible instinct say, rather, secret intelligence from 

1 Since the above was written, the statement is happily borne out by an 
official circular, issued by Lieutenant Maury, of the National Observatory, 
Washington, April 16th, 1851. By that circular, it appears that precisely 
such a chart is in course of completion ; and portions of it are presented 
in the circular. ' This chart divides the ocean into districts of five degrees 
of latitude by five degrees of longitude ; perpendicularly through each 
of which districts are twelve columns for the twelve months ; and hori- 
zontally through each of which districts are three lines ; one to show the 
number of days that have been spent in each month in every district, and 
the two others to show the number of days in which whales, sperm or 
right, have been seen.' 



THE CHART 249 

the Deity mostly swim in veins, as they are called ; con- 
tinuing their way along a given ocean-line with such 
undeviating exactitude, that no ship ever sailed her 
course, by any chart, with one tithe of such marvellous 
precision. Though, in these cases, the direction taken 
by any one whale be straight as a surveyor's parallel, and 
though the line of advance be strictly confined to its 
own unavoidable, straight wake, yet the arbitrary vein 
in which at these times he is said to swim, generally 
embraces some few miles in width (more or less, as the 
vein is presumed to expand or contract) ; but never 
exceeds the visual sweep from the whale-ship's mast- 
heads, when circumspectly gliding along this magic zone. 
The sum is, that at particular seasons within that breadth 
and along that path, migrating whales may with great 
confidence be looked for. 

And hence not only at substantiated times, upon well- 
known separate feeding-grounds, could Ahab hope to 
encounter his prey ; but in crossing the widest expanses 
of water between those grounds he could, by his art, so 
place and time himself on his way, as even then not to be 
wholly without prospect of a meeting. 

There was a circumstance which at first sight seemed to 
entangle his delirious but still methodical scheme. But 
not so in reality, perhaps. Though the gregarious sperm 
whales have their regular seasons for particular grounds, 
yet in general you cannot conclude that the herds which 
haunted such and such a latitude or longitude this year, 
say, will turn out to be identically the same with those 
that were found there the preceding season ; though 
there are peculiar and unquestionable instances where 
the contrary of this has proved true. In general, the same 
remark, only within a less wide limit, applies to the soli- 
taries and hermits among the matured, aged sperm whales. 
So that though Moby-Dick had in a former year been seen, 



250 MOBY-DICK 

for example, on what is called the Seychelle ground in the 
Indian Ocean, or Volcano Bay on the Japanese coast ; 
yet it did not follow, that were the Pequod to visit either 
of those spots at any subsequent corresponding season, 
she would infallibly encounter him there. So, too, with 
some other feeding -grounds, where he had at times 
revealed himself. But all these seemed only his casual 
stopping-places and ocean-inns, so to speak, not his places 
of prolonged abode. And where Ahab's chances of 
accomplishing his object have hitherto been spoken of, 
allusion has only been made to whatever wayside, ante- 
cedent, extra prospects were his, ere a particular set time 
or place were attained, when all possibilities would become 
probabilities, and, as Ahab fondly thought, every possi- 
bility the next thing to a certainty. That particular set 
time and place were conjoined in the one technical phrase 
the Season-on-the-Line. For there and then, for 
several consecutive years, Moby-Dick had been periodic- 
ally descried, lingering in those waters for a while, as the 
sun, in its annual round, loiters for a predicted interval 
in any one sign of the Zodiac. There it was, too, that 
most of the deadly encounters with the White Whale had 
taken place ; there the waves were storied with his deeds ; 
there also was that tragic spot where the monomaniac old 
man had found the awful motive to his vengeance. But 
in the cautious comprehensiveness and unloitering vigi- 
lance with which Ahab threw his brooding soul into this 
unfaltering hunt, he would not permit himself to rest all 
his hopes upon the one crowning fact above mentioned, 
however flattering it might be to those hopes ; nor in the 
sleeplessness of his vow could he so tranquillise his unquiet 
heart as to postpone all intervening quest. 

Now, the Pequod had sailed from Nantucket at the very 
beginning of the Season-on-the-Line. No possible en- 
deavour then could enable her commander to make the 



THE CHART 251 

great passage southward, double Cape Horn, and then 
running down sixty degrees of latitude arrive in the 
equatorial Pacific in time to cruise there. Therefore, he 
must wait for the next ensuing season. Yet the prema- 
ture hour of the Pequod's sailing had, perhaps, been 
correctly selected by Ahab, with a view to this very com- 
plexion of things. Because, an interval of three hundred 
and sixty-five days and nights was before him ; an inter- 
val which, instead of impatiently enduring ashore, he 
would spend in a miscellaneous hunt ; if by chance the 
White Whale, spending his vacation in seas far remote 
from his periodical feeding-grounds, should turn up his 
wrinkled brow off the Persian Gulf, or in the Bengal Bay, 
or China Seas, or in any other waters haunted by his race. 
So that Monsoons, Pampas, Nor'-Westers, Harmattans, 
Trades ; any wind but the Levanter and Simoom, might 
blow Moby-Dick into the devious zig-zag world-circle of 
the Pequod's circumnavigating wake. 

But granting all this ; yet, regarded discreetly and 
coolly, seems it not but a mad idea, this ; that in the broad 
boundless ocean, one solitary whale, even if encountered, 
should be thought capable of individual recognition from 
his hunter, even as a white-bearded Mufti in the thronged 
thoroughfares of Constantinople ? Yes. For the peculiar 
snow-white brow of Moby-Dick, and his snow-white hump, 
could not but be unmistakable. And have I not tallied 
the whale, Ahab would mutter to himself, as after poring 
over his charts till long after midnight he would throw 
himself back in reveries tallied him, and shall he escape ? 
His broad fins are bored, and scalloped out like a lost 
sheep's ear ! And here, his mad mind would run on in a 
breathless race ; till a weariness and faintness of ponder- 
ing came over him ; and in the open air of the deck he 
would seek to recover his strength. Ah, God ! what 
trances of torments does that man endure who is consumed 



252 MOBY-DICK 

with one unachieved revengeful desire. He sleeps with 
clenched hands ; and wakes with his own bloody nails in 
his palms. 

Often, when forced from his hammock by exhausting 
and intolerably vivid dreams of the night, which, resuming 
his own intense thoughts through the day, carried them 
on amid a clashing of frenzies, and whirled them round 
and round in his blazing brain, till the very throbbing 
of his life-spot became insufferable anguish ; and when, 

was sometimes the case, these spiritual throes in him 
heaved his being up from its base, and a chasm seemed 
opening in him, from which forked flames and lightnings 
shot up, and accursed fiends beckoned him to leap down 
among them ; when this hell in himself yawned beneath 
him, a wild cry would be heard through the ship ; and 
with glaring eyes Ahab would burst from his state-room, 
as though escaping from a bed that was on fire. Yet 
these, perhaps, instead of being the unsuppressible 
symptoms of some latent weakness, or fright at his own 
resolve, were but the plainest tokens of its intensity. For, 
at such times, crazy Ahab, the scheming, unappeasedly 
steadfast hunter of the White Whale ; this Ahab that had 
gone to his hammock, was not the agent that so caused 
him to burst from it in horror again. The latter was the 
eternal, living principle or soul in him ; and in sleep, being 
for the time dissociated from the characterising mind, 
which at other times employed it for its outer vehicle or 
agent, it spontaneously sought escape from the scorching 
contiguity of the frantic thing, of which, for the time, it 
was no longer an integral. But as the mind does not 
exist unless leagued with the soul, therefore it must have 
been that, in Ahab's case, yielding up all his thoughts and 
fancies to his one supreme purpose ; that purpose, by its 
own sheer inveteracy of will, forced itself against gods 
and devils into a kind of self-assumed, independent being 



THE CHART 253 

of its own. Nay, could grimly live and burn, while the 
common vitality to which it was conjoined, fled horror- 
stricken from the unbidden and unfathered birth. There- 
fore, the tormented spirit that glared out of bodily eyes, 
when what seemed Ahab rushed from his room, was for 
the time but a vacated thing, a formless somnambulistic 
being, a ray of living light, to be sure, but without an 
object to colour, and therefore a blankness in itself. God 
help thee, old man, thy thoughts have created a creature 
in thee ; and he whose intense thinking thus makes him 
a Prometheus ; a vulture feeds upon that heart forever ; 
that vulture the very creature he creates. 



CHAPTER XLV 

THE AFFIDAVIT 

So far as what there may be of a narrative in this book ; 
and, indeed, as indirectly touching one or two very inter- 
esting and curious particulars in the habits of sperm 
whales, the foregoing chapter, in its earlier part, is as 
important a one as will be found in this volume ; but 
the leading matter of it requires to be still further and 
more familiarly enlarged upon, in order to be adequately 
understood, and moreover to take away any incredulity 
which a profound ignorance of the entire subject may 
induce in some minds, as to the natural verity of the main 
points of this affair. 

I care not to perform this part of my task methodically ; 
but shall be content to produce the desired impression by 
separate citations of items, practically or reliably known 
to me as a whaleman ; and from these citations, I take 
it, the conclusion aimed at will naturally follow of itself. 

First : I have personally known three instances where 
a whale, after receiving a harpoon, has effected a complete 
escape ; and, after an interval (in one instance of three 
years), has been again struck by the same hand, and slain ; 
when the two irons, both marked by the same private 
cipher, have been taken from the body. In the instance 
where three years intervened between the flinging of the 
two harpoons ; and I think it may have been something 
more than that ; the man who darted them happening, 
in the interval, to go in a trading-ship on a voyage to 
Africa, went ashore there, joined a discovery party, and 

254 



THE AFFIDAVIT 255 

penetrated far into the interior, where he travelled for a 
period of nearly two years, often endangered by serpents, 
savages, tigers, poisonous miasmas, with all the other 
common perils incident to wandering in the heart of un- 
known regions. Meanwhile, the whale he had struck 
must also have been on its travels ; no doubt it had thrice 
circumnavigated the globe, brushing with its flanks all 
the coasts of Africa ; but to no purpose. This man and 
this whale again came together, and the one vanquished 
the other. I say I, myself, have known three instances 
similar to this ; that is in two of them I saw the whales 
struck ; and, upon the second attack, saw the two irons 
with the respective marks cut in them, afterward taken 
from the dead fish. In the three-year instance, it so fell 
out that I was in the boat both times, first and last, and 
the last time distinctly recognised a peculiar sort of huge 
mole under the whale's eye, which I had observed there 
three years previous. I say three years, but I am pretty 
sure it was more than that. Here are three instances, 
then, which I personally know the truth of ; but I have 
heard of many other instances from persons whose veracity 
in the matter there is no good ground to impeach. 

Secondly : It is well known in the sperm whale fishery, 
however ignorant the world ashore maybe of it, that there 
have been several memorable historical instances where a 
particular whale in the ocean has been at distant times 
and places popularly cognisable. Why such a whale 
became thus marked was not altogether arid originally 
owing to his bodily peculiarities as distinguished from 
other whales ; for however peculiar in that respect any 
chance whale may be, they soon put an end to his peculi- 
arities by killing him, and boiling him down into a peculi- 
arly valuable oil. No : the reason was this : that from 
the fatal experiences of the fishery there hung a terrible 
prestige of perilousness about such a whale as there did 



256 MOBY-DICK 

about Rinaldo Rinaldini, insomuch that most fishermen 
were content to recognise him by merely touching their 
tarpaulins when he would be discovered lounging by them 
on the sea, without seeking to cultivate a more intimate 
acquaintance. Like some poor devils ashore that happen 
to know an irascible great man, they make distant unob- 
trusive salutations to him in the street, lest if they pursued 
the acquaintance further, they might receive a summary 
thump for their presumption. 

But not only did each of these famous whales enjoy 
great individual celebrity nay, you may call it an ocean- 
wide renown ; not only was he famous in life and now is 
immortal in forecastle stories after death, but he was 
admitted into all the rights, privileges, and distinctions 
of a name ; had as much a name indeed as Cambyses or 
Caesar. Was it not so, O Timor Tom ! thou famed 
leviathan, scarred like an iceberg, who so long didst lurk 
in the oriental straits of that name, whose spout was oft 
seen from the palmy beach of Ombay ? Was it not so, 
New Zealand Jack ! thou terror of all cruisers that 
crossed their wakes in the vicinity of the Tattoo Land? 
Was it not so, Morquan ! King of Japan, whose lofty 
jet they say at times assumed the semblance of a snow- 
white cross against the sky ? Was it not so, Don 
Miguel ! thou Chilian whale, marked like an old tortoise 
with mystic hieroglyphics upon the back I In plain prose, 
here are four whales as well known to the students of 
Cetacean History as Marius or Sylla to the classic scholar. 

But this is not all. New Zealand Tom and Don Miguel, 
after at various times creating great havoc among the 
boats of different vessels, were finally gone in quest of, 
systematically hunted out, chased and killed by valiant 
whaling-captains, who heaved up their anchors with that 
express object as much in view, as in setting out through 
the Narragansett Woods, Captain Butler of old had it 



THE AFFIDAVIT 257 

in his mind to capture that notorious murderous savage 
Annawon, the headmost warrior of the Indian King 
Philip. 

I do not know where I can find a better place than just 
here, to make mention of one or two other things, which 
to me seem important, as in printed form establishing 
in all respects the reasonableness of the whole story of 
the White Whale, more especially the catastrophe. For 
this is one of those disheartening instances where truth 
requires full as much bolstering as error. So ignorant 
are most landsmen of some of the plainest and most 
palpable wonders of the world, that without some hints 
touching the plain facts, historical and otherwise, of the 
fishery, they might scout at Moby-Dick as a monstrous 
fable, or still worse and more detestable, a hideous and 
intolerable allegory. 

First : Though most men have some vague flitting ideas 
of the general perils of the grand fishery, yet they have 
nothing like a fixed, vivid conception of those perils, 
and the frequency with which they recur. One reason 
perhaps is, that not one in fifty of the actual disasters and 
deaths by casualties in the fishery, ever finds a public 
record at home, however transient and immediately 
forgotten that record. Do you suppose that that poor 
fellow there, who this moment perhaps caught by the 
whale-line off the coast of New Guinea, is being carried 
down to the bottom of the sea by the sounding leviathan 
do you suppose that that poor fellow's name will appear 
in the newspaper obituary you will read to-morrow at 
your breakfast ? No : because the mails are very 
irregular between here and New Guinea. In fact, did 
you ever hear what might be called regular news direct 
or indirect from New Guinea ? Yet I tell you that 
upon one particular voyage which I made to the Pacific, 
among many others we spoke thirty different ships, every 

VOL. j. B 



258 MOBY-DICK 

one of which had had a death by a whale, some of them 
more than one, and three that had each lost a boat's crew. 
For God's sake, be economical with your lamps and 
candles ! not a gallon you burn, but at least one drop of 
man's blood was spilled for it. 

Secondly : People ashore have indeed some indefinite 
idea that a whale is an enormous creature of enormous 
power ; but I have ever found that when narrating to 
them some specific example of this twofold enormousness, 
they have significantly complimented me upon my 
facetiousness ; when, I declare upon my soul, I had no 
more idea of being facetious than Moses, when he wrote 
the history of the plagues of Egypt. 

But fortunately the special point I here seek can be 
established upon testimony entirely independent of my 
own. That point is this : The sperm whale is in some 
cases sufficiently powerful, knowing, and judiciously 
malicious, as with direct aforethought to stave in, utterly 
destroy, and sink a large ship ; and what is more, the 
sperm whale has done it. 

First : In the year 1820 the ship Essex, Captain 
Pollard, of Nantucket, was cruising in the Pacific Ocean. 
One day she saw spouts, lowered her boats, and gave chase 
to a shoal of sperm whales. Ere long, several of the 
whales were wounded ; when, suddenly, a very large 
whale escaping from the boats, issued from the shoal, 
and bore directly down upon the ship. Dashing his 
forehead against her hull, he so stove her in, that in less 
than ' ten minutes ' she settled down and fell over. Not 
a surviving plank of her has been seen since. After the 
severest exposure, part of the crew reached the land in 
their boats. Being returned home at last, Captain 
Pollard once more sailed for the Pacific in command of 
another ship, but the gods shipwrecked him again upon 
unknown rocks and breakers ; for the second time his 



THE AFFIDAVIT 259 

ship was utterly lost, and forthwith forswearing the sea, 
he has never tempted it since. At this day Captain Pollard 
is a resident of Nantucket. I have seen Owen Chace, 
who was chief mate of the Essex at the time of the tragedy ; 
I have read his plain and faithful narrative ; I have 
conversed with his son ; and all this within a few miles 
of the scene of the catastrophe. 1 

Secondly : The ship Union, also of Nantucket, was in 
the year 1 807 totally lost off the Azores by a similar onset, 
but the authentic particulars of this catastrophe I have 
never chanced to encounter, though from the whale- 
hunters I have now and then heard casual allusions to it. 

Thirdly : Some eighteen or twenty years ago Commo- 
dore J , then commanding an American sloop -of -war 

of the first class, happened to be dining with a party of 
whaling-captains, on board a Nantucket ship in the 

1 The following are extracts from Chace's narrative : ' Every fact 
seemed to warrant me in concluding that it was anything but chance 
which directed his operations ; he made two several attacks upon the ship, 
at a short interval between them, both of which, according to their 
direction, were calculated to do us the most injury, by being made ahead, 
and thereby combining the speed of the two objects for the shook ; to 
effect which, the exact manoeuvres which he made were necessary. His 
aspect was most horrible, and such as indicated resentment and fury. He 
came directly from the shoal which we had just before entered, and in 
which we had struck three of his companions, as if fired with revenge for 
their sufferings.' Again : ' At all events, the whole circumstances taken 
together, all happening before my own eyes, and producing, at the time, 
impressions in my mind of decided, calculating mischief, on the part of 
the whale (many of which impressions I cannot now recall), induce me to 
be satisfied that I am correct in my opinion.' 

Here are his reflections some time after quitting the ship, during a 
black night in an open boat, when almost despairing of reaching any 
hospitable shore. ' The dark ocean and swelling waters were nothing ; 
the fears of being swallowed up by some dreadful tempest, or dashed 
upon hidden rocks, with all the other ordinary subjects of fearful con- 
templation, seemed scarcely entitled to a moment's thought ; the dismal- 
looking wreck, and the horrid aspect and revenge of the whale, wholly 
engrossed my reflections until day again made its appearance.' 

In another place p. 45, he speaks of ' the mysterious and mortal 
attack of the animal.' 



260 MOBY-DICK 

harbour of Oahu, Sandwich Islands. Conversation turn- 
ing upon whales, the commodore was pleased to be scepti- 
cal touching the amazing strength ascribed to them by the 
professional gentlemen present. He peremptorily denied, 
for example, that any whale could so smite his stout sloop- 
of-war as to cause her to leak so much as a thimbleful. 
Very good ; but there is more coming. Some weeks after, 
the commodore set sail in this impregnable craft for 
Valparaiso. But he was stopped on the way by a portly 
sperm whale, that begged a few moments' confidential 
business with him. That business consisted in fetching 
the commodore's craft such a thwack, that with all his 
pumps going he made straight for the nearest port to 
heave down and repair. I am not superstitious, but I 
consider the commodore's interview with that whale as 
providential. Was not Saul of Tarsus converted from 
unbelief by a similar fright ? I tell you, the sperm whale 
will stand no nonsense. 

I will now refer you to Langsdorff 's Voyages for a little 
circumstance in point, peculiarly interesting to the writer 
hereof. Langsdorff, you must know by the way, was 
attached to the Russian Admiral Krusenstern's famous Dis- 
co very Expedition in the beginning of the present century. 
Captain Langsdorff thus begins his seventeenth chapter. 

4 By the thirteenth of May our ship was ready to sail, 
and the next day we were out in the open sea, on our way 
to Ochotsh. The weather was very clear and fine, but 
so intolerably cold that we were obliged to keep on our 
fur clothing. For some days we had very little wind ; 
it was not till the nineteenth that a brisk gale from the 
north-west sprang up. An uncommon large whale, the 
body of which was larger than the ship itself, lay almost 
at the surface of the water, but was not perceived by any- 
one on board till the moment when the ship, which was 
in full sail, was almost upon him, so that it was impossible 



THE AFFIDAVIT 261 

to prevent its striking against him. We were thus placed 
in the most imminent danger, as this gigantic creature, 
setting up its back, raised the ship three feet at least out 
of the water. The masts reeled, and the sails fell alto- 
gether, while we who were below all sprang instantly 
upon the deck, concluding that we had struck upon some 
rock ; instead of this we saw the monster sailing off with 
the utmost gravity and solemnity. Captain D'Wolf 
applied immediately to the pumps to examine whether 
or not the vessel had received any damage from the 
shock, but we found that very happily it had escaped 
entirely uninjured.' 

Now, the Captain D'Wolf here alluded to as command- 
ing the ship in question, is a New Englander, who, after 
a long life of unusual adventures as a sea-captain, this 
day resides in the village of Dorchester near Boston. I 
have the honour of being a nephew of his. I have par- 
ticularly questioned him concerning this passage in Langs- 
dorfL He substantiates every word. The ship, however, 
was by no means a large one : a Russian craft built on 
the Siberian coast, and purchased by my uncle after 
bartering away the vessel in which he sailed from home. 

In that up and down manly book of old-fashioned 
adventure, so full, too, of honest wonders the voyage 
of Lionel Wafer, one of ancient Dampier's old chums 
I found a little matter set down so like that just quoted 
from Langsdorff, that I cannot forbear inserting it here 
for a corroborative example, if such be needed. 

Lionel, it seems, was on his way to ' John Ferdi- 
nando,' as he calls the modern Juan Fernandez. ' In 
our way thither,' he says, 'about four o'clock in the 
morning, when we were about one hundred and fifty 
leagues from the Main of America, our ship felt a terrible 
shock, which put our men in such consternation that they 
could hardly tell where they were or what to think ; but 



262 MOBY-DICK 

everyone began to prepare for death. And, indeed, the 
shock was so sudden and violent, that we took it for granted 
the ship had struck against a rock ; but when the amaze- 
ment was a little over, we cast the lead, and sounded, but 
found no ground. * * * The suddenness of the 
shock made the guns leap in their carriages, and several of 
the men were shaken out of their hammocks. Captain 
Davis, who lay with his head on a gun, was thrown out 
of his cabin ! ' Lionel then goes on to impute the shock 
to an earthquake, and seems to substantiate the imputa- 
tion by stating that a great earthquake, somewhere about 
that time,, did actually do great mischief along the Spanish 
land. But I should not much wonder if, in the darkness 
of that early hour of the morning, the shock was after all 
caused by an unseen whale vertically bumping the hull 
from beneath. 

I might proceed with several more examples, one way 
or another known to me, of the great power and malice 
at times of the sperm whale. In more than one instance, 
he has been known, not only to chase the assailing boats 
back to their ships, but to pursue the ship itself, and long 
withstand all the lances hurled at him from its decks. 
The English ship Pusie Hall can tell a story on that head ; 
and, as for his strength, let me say, that there have been 
examples where the lines attached to a running sperm 
whale have, in a calm, been transferred to the ship, and 
secured there ; the whale towing her great hull through 
the water, as a horse walks off with a cart. Again, it is 
very often observed that, if the sperm whale, once struck, 
is allowed time to rally, he then acts, not so often with 
blind rage, as with wilful, deliberate designs of destruction 
to his pursuers ; nor is it without conveying some elo- 
quent indication of his character, that upon being attacked 
he will frequently open his mouth, and retain it in that 
dread expansion for several consecutive minutes. But I 



THE AFFIDAVIT 263 

must be content with only one more and a concluding 
illustration ; a remarkable and most significant one, by 
which you will not fail to see, that not only is the most 
marvellous event in this book corroborated by plain 
facts of the present day, but that these marvels (like all 
marvels) are mere repetitions of the ages ; so that for 
the millionth time we say amen with Solomon Verily 
there is nothing new under the sun. 

In the sixth Christian century lived Procopius, a Chris- 
tian magistrate of Constantinople, in the days when 
Justinian was Emperor and Belisarius general. As many 
know, he wrote the history of his own times, a work every 
way of uncommon value. By the best authorities, he 
has always been considered a most trustworthy and un- 
exaggerating historian, except in some one or two par- 
ticulars, not at all affecting the matter presently to be 
mentioned. 

Now, in this history of his, Procopius mentions that, 
during the term of his prefecture at Constantinople, a 
great sea-monster was captured in the neighbouring 
Propontis, or Sea of Marmora, after having destroyed 
vessels at intervals in those waters for a period of more 
than fifty years. A fact thus set down in substantial 
history cannot easily be gainsaid. Nor is there any 
reason it should be. Of what precise species this sea- 
monster was, is not mentioned. But as he destroyed 
ships, as well as for other reasons, he must have been a 
whale ; and I am strongly inclined to think a sperm whale. 
And I will tell you why. For a long time I fancied that 
the sperm whale had been always unknown in the Medi- 
terranean and the deep waters connecting with it. Even 
now I am certain that those seas are not, and perhaps 
never can be, in the present constitution of things, a place 
for his habitual gregarious resort. But further investi- 
gations have recently proved to me, that in modern times 



264 MOBY-DICK 

there have been isolated instances of the presence of the 
sperm whale in the Mediterranean. I am told, on good 
authority, that on the Barbary coast, a Commodore 
Davis of the British navy found the skeleton of a sperm 
whale. Now, as a vessel of war readily passes through 
the Dardanelles, hence a sperm whale could, by the same 
route, pass out of the Mediterranean into the Propontis. 
In the Propontis, as far as I can learn, none of that 
peculiar substance called brit is to be found, the aliment 
of the right whale. But I have every reason to believe 
that the food of the sperm whale squid or cuttle-fish 
lurks at the bottom of that sea, because large creatures, 
but by no means the largest of that sort, have been found 
at its surface. If, then, you properly put these statements 
together, and reason upon them a bit, you will clearly 
perceive that, according to all human reasoning, Pro- 
copius's sea-monster, that for half a century stove the 
ships of a Roman Emperor, must in all probability have 
been a sperm whale. 



CHAPTER XLVI 

SURMISES 

THOUGH, consumed with the hot fire of his purpose, 
Ahab in all his thoughts and actions ever had in view the 
ultimate capture of Moby-Dick ; though he seemed ready 
to sacrifice all mortal interests to that one passion ; never- 
theless it may have been that he was by nature and long 
habituation far too wedded to a fiery whaleman's ways, 
altogether to abandon the collateral prosecution of the 
voyage. Or at least if this were otherwise, there were 
not wanting other motives much more influential with 
him. It would be refining too much, perhaps, even con- 
sidering his monomania, to hint that his vindictiveness 
toward the White Whale might have possibly extended 
itself in some degree to all sperm whales, and that the 
more monsters he slew, by so much the more he multiplied 
the chances that each subsequently encountered whale 
would prove to be the hated one he hunted. But if such 
an hypothesis be indeed exceptionable, there were still 
additional considerations which, though not so strictly 
according with the wildness of his ruling passion, yet were 
by no means incapable of swaying him. 

To accomplish his object Ahab must use tools ; and 
of all tools used in the shadow of the moon, men are most 
apt to get out of order. He knew, for example, that 
however magnetic his ascendency in some respects was 
over Starbuck, yet that ascendency did not cover the 
complete spiritual man any more than mere corporeal 
superiority involves intellectual mastership ; for to the 

265 



266 MOBY-DICK 

purely spiritual, the intellectual but stand in a sort of 
corporeal relation. Starbuck's body and Starbuck's 
coerced will were Ahab's, so long as Ahab kept his magnet 
at Starbuck's brain ; still he knew that for all this the 
chief mate, in his soul, abhorred his captain's quest, and 
could he, would joyfully disintegrate himself from it, 
or even frustrate it. It might be that a long interval 
would elapse ere the White Whale was seen. During that 
long interval Starbuck would ever be apt to fall into open 
relapses of rebellion against his captain's leadership, 
unless some ordinary, prudential, circumstantial influ- 
ences were brought to bear upon him. Not only that, 
but the subtle insanity of Ahab respecting Moby-Dick 
was no ways more significantly manifested than in his 
superlative sense and shrewdness in foreseeing that, for 
the present, the hunt should in some way be stripped of 
that strange imaginative impiousness which naturally 
invested it ; that the full terror of the voyage must be 
kept withdrawn into the obscure background (for few 
men's courage is proof against protracted meditation 
unrelieved by action) ; that when they stood their long 
night-watches, his officers and men must have some nearer 
things to think of than Moby-Dick. For however eagerly 
and impetuously the savage crew had hailed the announce- 
ment of his quest ; yet all sailors of all sorts are more or 
less capricious and unreliable they live in the varying 
outer weather, and they inhale its fickleness and when 
retained for any object remote and blank in the pursuit, 
however promissory of life and passion in the end, it is 
above all things requisite that temporary interests and 
employments should intervene and hold them healthily 
suspended for the final dash. 

Nor was Ahab unmindful of another thing. In times of 
strong emotion mankind disdain all base considerations ; 
but such times are evanescent. The permanent con- 



SURMISES 267 

stitutional condition of the manufactured man, thought 
Ahab, is sordidness. Granting that the White Whale 
fully incites the hearts of this my savage crew, and playing 
round their savageness even breeds a certain generous 
knight -errant ism in them, still, while for the love of it 
they give chase to Moby-Dick, they must also have food 
for their more common, daily appetites. For even the 
high lifted and chivalric Crusaders of old times were not 
content to traverse two thousand miles of land to fight 
for their holy sepulchre, without committing burglaries, 
picking pockets, and gaining other pious perquisites by 
the way. Had they been strictly held to their one final 
and romantic object that final and romantic object, 
too many would have turned from in disgust. I will not 
strip these men, thought Ahab, of all hopes of cash ay, 
cash. They may scorn cash now ; but let some months 
go by, and no perspective promise of it to them, and then \ 
this same quiescent cash all at once mutinying in them, 
this same cash would soon cashier Ahab. 

Nor was there wanting still another precautionary 
motive more related to Ahab personally. Having im- 
pulsively, it is probable, and perhaps somewhat pre- 
maturely revealed the prime but private purpose of the 
Pequod's voyage, Ahab was now entirely conscious that, 
in so doing, he had indirectly laid himself open to the 
unanswerable charge of usurpation ; and with perfect 
impunity, both moral and legal, his crew if so disposed, 
and to that end competent, could refuse all further 
obedience to him, and even violently wrest from him the 
command. From even the barely hinted imputation 
of usurpation, and the possible consequences of such 
a suppressed impression gaining ground, Ahab must of 
course have been most anxious to protect himself. That 
protection could only consist in his own predominating 
brain and heart and hand, backed by a heedful, closely 



268 MOBY-DICK 

calculating attention to every minute atmospheric influ- 
ence which it was possible for his crew to be subjected to. 

For all these reasons then, and others perhaps too 
analytic to be verbally developed here, Ahab plainly saw 
that he must still in a good degree continue true to the 
natural, nominal purpose of the Pequod's voyage ; observe 
all customary usages ; and not only that, but force 
himself to evince all his well-known passionate interest 
in the general pursuit of his profession. 

Be all this as it may, his voice was now often heard 
hailing the three mast-heads and admonishing them to 
keep a bright look-out, and not omit reporting even a 
porpoise. This vigilance was not long without reward. 



CHAPTER XLVII 

THE MAT-MAKER 

IT was a cloudy, sultry afternoon ; the seamen were 
lazily lounging about the decks, or vacantly gazing over 
into the lead-coloured waters. Queequeg and I were 
mildly employed weaving what is called a sword-mat, 
for an additional lashing to our boat. So still and 
subdued and yet somehow preluding was all the scene, 
and such an incantation of revelry lurked in the air, 
that each silent sailor seemed resolved into his own 
invisible self. 

I was the attendant or page of Queequeg, while busy 
at the mat. As I kept passing and repassing the filling 
or woof of marline between the long yarns of the warp, 
using my own hand for the shuttle, and as Queequeg, 
standing sideways, ever and anon slid his heavy oaken 
sword between the threads, and idly looking off upon 
the water, carelessly and unthinkingly drove home every 
yarn : I say so strange a dreaminess did there then reign 
all over the ship and all over the sea, only broken by the 
intermitting dull sound of the sword, that it seemed as 
if this were the Loom of Time, and I myself were a shuttle 
mechanically weaving and weaving away at the Fates. 
There lay the fixed threads of the warp subject to but one 
single, ever returning, unchanging vibration, and that 
vibration merely enough to admit of the crosswise inter- 
blending of other threads with its own. This warp 
seemed necessity ; and here, thought I, with my own hand 
I ply my own shuttle and weave my own destiny into these 

269 



270 MOBY-DICK 

unalterable threads. Meantime, Queequeg's impulsive, 
indifferent sword, sometimes hitting the woof slantingly, 
or crookedly, or strongly, or weakly, as the case might 
be ; and by this difference in the concluding blow pro- 
ducing a corresponding contrast in the final aspect of the 
completed fabric ; this savage's sword, thought I, which 
thus finally shapes and fashions both warp and woof ; this 
easy, indifferent sword must be chance ay, chance, free 
will, and necessity no wise incompatible all inter- 
weavingly working together. The straight warp of neces- 
sity, not to be swerved from its ultimate course its every 
/ alternating vibration, indeed, only tending to that ; free 
will still free to ply her shuttle between given threads ; 
and chance, though restrained in its play within the right 
lines of necessity, and sideways in its motions directed 
by free will, though thus prescribed to by both, chance 
by turns rules either, and has the last featuring blow at 

events. 

******* 

Thus we were weaving and weaving away when I 
I started at a soundjgq strange, long drawn, and musically 
I wild and unearthly, that the ball of free will dropped from 
my hand, and I stood gazing up at the clouds whence that 
voice dropped like a wing. High aloft in the cross-trees 
was that mad Gay-Header, Tashtego. His body was 
reaching eagerly forward, his hand stretched out like a 
wand, and at brief sudden intervals he continued his cries. 
To be sure, the same sound was that very moment perhaps 
being heard all over the seas, from hundreds of whale- 
men's look-outs perched as high in the air ; but from 
few of those lungs could that accustomed old cry have 
derived such a marvellous cadence as from Tashtego the 
Indian's. 

As he stood hovering over you half suspended in air, 
so wildly and eagerly peering toward the horizon, you 



THE MAT-MAKER 271 

would have thought him some prophet or seer beholding 
the shadows of Fate, and by those wild cries announcing 
their coming. 

' There she blows ! there ! there ! there ! she blows ! 
she blows ! ' 

4 Where away ? ' 

' On the lee-beam, about two miles off ! a school of 
them ! ' 

Instantly all was commotion. 

The sperm whale blows as a clock ticks, with the 
same undeviating and reliable uniformity. And thereby 
whalemen distinguish this fish from other tribes of 
his genus. 

' There go flukes ! ' was now the cry from Tashtego ; 
and the whales disappeared. 

4 Quick, steward ! ' cried Ahab. ' Time ! time ! ' 

Dough-Boy hurried below, glanced at the watch, and 
reported the exact minute to Ahab. 

The ship was now kept away from the wind, and she 
went gently rolling before it. Tashtego reporting that 
the whales had gone down heading to leeward, we con- 
fidently looked to see them again directly in advance of 
our bows. For that singular craft at times evinced by 
the sperm whale when, sounding with his head in one 
direction, he nevertheless, while concealed beneath the 
surface, mills round, and swiftly swims off in the opposite 
quarter this deceitfulness of his could not now be in 
action ; for there was no reason to suppose that the fish 
seen by Tashtego had been in any way alarmed, or indeed 
knew at all of our vicinity. One of the men selected for 
ship-keepers that is, those not appointed to the boats 
by this time relieved the Indian at the mainmast-head. 
The sailors at the fore and mizen had come down ; the 
line-tubs were fixed in their places ; the cranes were 
thrust out ; the main-yard was backed, and the three 



272 MOBY-DICK 

boats swung over the sea like three samphire baskets over 
high cliffs. Outside of the bulwarks their eager crews with 
one hand clung to the rail, while one foot was expectantly 
poised on the gunwale. So look the long line of man-of- 
war's men about to throw themselves on board an enemy's 
ship. 

But at this critical instant a sudden exclamation was 
heard that took every eye from the whale. With a start 
all glared at dark Ahab, who was surrounded by five dusky 
phantoms that seemed fresh formed out of air. 



CHAPTER XLVIII 

THE FIRST LOWERING 

THE phantoms, for so they then seemed, were flitting on 
the other side of the deck, and, with a noiseless celerity, 
were casting loose the tackles and bands of the boat which 
swung there. This boat had always been deemed one 
of the spare boats, though technically called the captain's, 
on account of its hanging from the starboard quarter. 
The figure that now stood by its bows was tall and swart, 
with one white tooth evilly protruding from its steel-like 
lips. A rumpled Chinese jacket of black cotton funereally 
invested him, with wide black trowsers of the same dark 
stuff. But strangely crowning this ebonness was a 
glistening white plaited turban, the living hair braided 
and coiled round and round upon his head. Less swart 
in aspect, the companions of this figure were of that vivid, 
tiger-yellow complexion peculiar to some of the aboriginal 
natives of the Manillas ; a race notorious for a certain 
diabolism of subtlety, and by some honest white mariners 
supposed to be the paid spies and secret confidential 
agents on the water of the devil, their lord, whose counting- 
room they suppose to be elsewhere. 

While yet the wondering ship's company were gazing 
upon these strangers, Ahab cried out to the white-turbaned 
old man at their head, ' All ready there, Fedallah ? ' 

' Ready,' was the half -hissed reply. 

4 Lower away then ; d' ye hear ? ' shouting across the 
deck. ' Lower away there, I say.' 

Such was the thunder of his voice, that spite of their 

VOL. i. s 



274 MOBY-DICK 

amazement the men sprang over the rail ; the sheaves 
whirled round in the blocks ; with a wallow, the three 
boats dropped into the sea ; while, with a dexterous, off- 
handed daring, unknown in any other vocation, the sailors, 
goat-like, leaped down the rolling ship's side into the 
tossed boats below. 

Hardly had they pulled out from under the ship's lee, 
when a fourth keel, coming from the windward side, 
pulled round under the stern, and showed the five strangers 
rowing Ahab, who, standing erect in the stern, loudly 
hailed Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask, to spread themselves 
widely, so as to cover a large expanse of water. But with 
all their eyes again riveted upon the swart Fedallah and 
his crew, the inmates of the other boats obeyed not the 
command. 

' Captain Ahab ? ' said Starbuck. 

' Spread yourselves,' cried Ahab ; ' give way, all four 
boats. Thou, Flask, pull out more to leeward ! ' 

' Ay, ay, sir,' cheerily cried little King-Post, sweeping 
round his great steering -oar. ' Lay back ! ' addressing 
his crew. ' There ! there ! there again ! There she 
blows right ahead, boys ! lay back ! ' 

' Never heed yonder yellow boys, Archy.' 

' Oh, I don't mind 'em, sir,' said Archy ; ' I knew it all 
before now. Didn't I hear 'em in the hold ? And didn't 
I tell Cabaco here of it ? What say ye, Cabaco ? They 
are stowaways, Mr. Flask.' 

' Pull, pull, my fine hearts-alive ; pull, my children ; 
pull, my little ones,' drawlingly and soothingly sighed 
Stubb to his crew, some of whom still showed signs of 
uneasiness. ' Why don't you break your backbones, my 
boys ? What is it you stare at ? Those chaps in yonder 
boat ? Tut ! They are only five more hands come to 
help us never mind from where the more the merrier. 
Pull, then, do pull ; never mind the brimstone devils 



THE FIRST LOWERING 275 

are good fellows enough. So, so ; there you are now ; 
that 's the stroke for a thousand pounds ; that 's the 
stroke to sweep the stakes ! Hurrah for the gold cup 
of sperm oil, my heroes ! Three cheers, men all hearts- 
alive ! Easy, easy ; don't be in a hurry don't be in a 
hurry. Why don't you snap your oars, you rascals ? 
Bite something, you dogs ! So, so, so, then ; softly, 
softly ! That 's it that 's it ! long and strong. Give 
way there, give way ! The devil fetch ye, ye ragamuffin 
rapscallions ; ye are all asleep. Stop snoring, ye sleepers, 
and pull. Pull, will ye ? pull, can't ye ? pull, won't ye ? 
Why in the name of gudgeons and ginger-cakes don't ye 
pull ? pull and break something ! pull, and start your 
eyes out ! Here ! ' whipping out the sharp knife from his 
girdle ; ' every mother's son of ye draw his knife, and pull 
with the blade between his teeth. That J s it that 's it. 
Now ye do something ; that looks like it, my steel-bits. 
Start her start her, my silver-spoons ! Start her, 
marling-spikes ! ' 

Stubb's exordium to his crew is given here at large, 
because he had rather a peculiar way of talking to them 
in general, and especially in inculcating the religion of 
rowing. But you must not suppose from this specimen 
of his sermonisings that he ever flew into downright 
passions with his congregation. Not at all ; and therein 
consisted his chief peculiarity. He would say the most 
terrific things to his crew, in a tone so strangely com- 
pounded of fun and fury, and the fury seemed so calcu- 
lated merely as a spice to the fun, that no oarsman could 
hear such queer invocations without pulling for dear 
life, and yet pulling for the mere joke of the thing. Be- 
sides he all the time looked so easy and indolent himself, 
so loungingly managed his steering-oar, and so broadly 
gaped open-mouthed at times that the mere sight of 
such a yawning commander, by sheer force of contrast, 



276 MOBY-DICK 

acted like a charm upon the crew. Then again, Stubb 
was one of those odd sort of humorists, whose jollity 
is sometimes so curiously ambiguous, as to put all in- 
feriors on their guard in the matter of obeying them. 

In obedience to a sign from Ahab, Starbuck was now 
pulling obliquely across Stubb 's bow ; and when for a 
minute or so the two boats were pretty near to each other, 
Stubb hailed the mate. 

4 Mr. Starbuck ! larboard boat there, ahoy ! a word 
with ye, sir, if ye please ! ' 

' Halloa ! ' returned Starbuck, turning round not a 
single inch as he spoke ; still earnestly but whisperingly 
urging his crew ; his face set like a flint from Stubb 's. 

' What think ye of those yellow boys, sir ? ' 

' Smuggled on board, somehow, before the ship sailed. 
(Strong, strong, boys ! ') in a whisper to his crew, then 
speaking out loud again : ' A sad business, Mr. Stubb ! 
(Seethe her, seethe her, my lads !) but never mind, Mr. 
Stubb, all for the best. Let all your crew pull strong, 
come what will. (Spring, my men, spring !) There 's 
hogsheads of sperm ahead, Mr. Stubb, and that 's what 
ye came for. (Pull, my boys !) Sperm, sperm 's the 
play ! This at least is duty ; duty and profit hand in 
hand ! ' 

' Ay, ay, I thought as much,' soliloquised Stubb, 
when the boats diverged, c as soon as I clapt eye on 'em, 
I thought so. Ay, and that 's what he went into the 
after-hold for, so often, as Dough -Boy long suspected. 
They were hidden down there. The White Whale 's at 
the bottom of it. Well, well, so be it ! Can't be helped ! 
All right ! Give way, men ! It ain't the White Whale 
to-day ! Give way ! ' 

Now the advent of these outlandish strangers at such 
a critical instant as the lowering of the boats from the 
deck, this had not unreasonably awakened a sort of 



THE FIRST LOWERING 277 

superstitious amazement in some of the ship's company ; 
but Archy's fancied discovery having some time previous 
got abroad among them, though indeed not credited then, 
this had in some small measure prepared them for the 
event. It took off the extreme edge of their wonder ; 
and so what with all this and Stubb's confident way of 
accounting for their appearance, they were for the time 
freed from superstitious surmisings ; though the affair 
still left abundant room for all manner of wild conjectures 
as to dark Ahab's precise agency in the matter from the 
beginning. For me, I silently recalled the mysterious 
shadows I had seen creeping on board the Pequod during 
the dim Nantucket dawn, as well as the enigmatical 
hintings of the unaccountable Elijah. 

Meantime, Ahab, out of hearing of his officers, having 
sided the furthest to windward, was still ranging ahead 
of the other boats ; a circumstance bespeaking how potent 
a crew was pulling him. Those tiger-yellow creatures of 
his seemed all steel and whalebone ; like five trip-hammers 
they rose and fell with regular strokes of strength, which 
periodically started the boat along the water like a hori- 
zontal burst boiler out of a Mississippi steamer. As for 
Fedallah, who was seen pulling the harpooneer-oar, he 
had thrown aside his black jacket, and displayed his 
naked chest with the whole part of his body above the 
gunwale, clearly cut against the alternating depressions 
of the watery horizon ; while at the other end of the boat 
Ahab, with one arm, like a fencer's, thrown half backward 
into the air, as if to counterbalance any tendency to trip ; 
Ahab was seen steadily managing his steering -oar as in a j 
thousand boat lowerings ere the White Whale had torn( 
him. All at once the outstretched arm gave a peculiar 
motion and then remained fixed, while the boat's five oars 
were seen simultaneously peaked. Boat and crew sat 
motionless on the sea. Instantly the three spread boats 



278 MOBY-DICK 

in the rear paused on their way. The whales had irregu- 
larly settled bodily down into the blue, thus giving no 
distantly discernible token of the movement, though 
from his closer vicinity Ahab had observed it. 

4 Every man look out along his oars ! ' cried Starbuck. 
' Thou, Queequeg, stand up ! ' 

Nimbly springing up on the triangular raised box in 
the bow, the savage stood erect there, and with intensely 
eager eyes gazed off toward the spot where the chase 
had last been descried. Likewise upon the extreme stern 
of the boat where it was also triangularly platformed level 
with the gunwale, Starbuck himself was seen coolly and 
adroitly balancing himself to the jerking tossings of his 
chip of a craft, and silently eyeing the vast blue eye of 
the sea. 

Not very far distant Flask's boat was also lying breath- 
lessly still ; its commander recklessly standing upon the 
top of the logger-head, a stout sort of post rooted in the 
keel, and rising some two feet above the level of the stern 
platform. It is used for catching turns with the whale - 
line. Its top is not more spacious than the palm of a 
man's hand, and standing upon such a base as that, Flask 
seemed perched at the mast-head of some ship which had 
sunk to all but her trucks. But little King-Post was small 
and short, and at the same time little King-Post was full 
of a large and tall ambition, so that this logger-head stand- 
point of his did by no means satisfy King-Post. 

c I can't see three seas off ; tip us up an oar there, and 
let me on to that.' 

Upon this, Daggoo, with either hand upon the gunwale ' 
to steady his way, swiftly slid aft, and then erecting him- 
self volunteered his lofty shoulders for a pedestal. 

' Good a mast-head as any, sir. Will you mount ? ' 

' That I will, and thank ye very much, my fine fellow ; 
only I wish you fifty feet taller.' 



THE FIRST LOWERING 279 

Whereupon planting his feet firmly against two opposite 
planks of the boat, the gigantic negro, stooping a little, 
presented his flat palm to Flask's foot, and then 
putting Flask's hand on his hearse-plumed head and 
bidding him spring as he himself should toss, with one 
dexterous fling landed the little man high and dry on 
his shoulders. And here was Flask now standing, 
Daggoo with one lifted arm furnishing him with a breast- 
band to lean against and steady himself by. 

At any time it is a strange sight to the tyro to see with 
what wondrous habitude of unconscious skill the whale- 
man will maintain an erect posture in his boat, even when 
pitched about by the most riotously perverse and cross- 
running seas. Still more strange to see him giddily 
perched upon the logger-head itself, under such circum- 
stances. But the sight of little Flask mounted upon 
gigantic Daggoo was yet more curious ; for sustaining 
himself with a cool, indifferent, easy, unthought-of, 
barbaric majesty, the noble negro to every roll of the sea 
harmoniously rolled his fine form. On his broad back, 
flaxen-haired Flask seemed a snow-flake. The bearer 
looked nobler than the rider. Though truly vivacious, 
tumultuous, ostentatious little Flask would now and then 
stamp with impatience ; but not one added heave did he 
thereby give to the negro's lordly chest. So have I seen 
Passion and Vanity stamping the living magnanimous' 
earth, but the earth did not alter her tides and her seasons 
for that. 

Meanwhile Stubb, the third mate, betrayed no such 
far-gazing solicitudes. The whales might have made 
one of their regular soundings, not a temporary dive from 
mere fright ; and if that were the case, Stubb, as his 
wont in such cases, it seems, was resolved to solace the 
languishing interval with his pipe. He withdrew it from 
his hat-band, where he always wore it aslant like a feather. 



280 MOBY-DICK 

He loaded it, and rammed home the loading with his 
thumb-end ; but hardly had he ignited his match across 
the rough sandpaper of his hand, when Tashtego, his 
harpooneer, whose eyes had been setting to windward like 
two fixed stars, suddenly dropped like light from his erect 
attitude to his seat, crying out in a quick frenzy of 
hurry, ' Down, down all, and give way ! there they are ! ' 

To a landsman, no whale, nor any sign of a herring, 
would have been visible at that moment ; nothing but a 
troubled bit of greenish-white water, and thin scattered 
puffs of vapour hovering over it, and suffusingly blowing 
off to leeward, like the confused scud from white rolling 
billows. The air around suddenly vibrated and tingled, 
as it were, like the air over intensely heated plates of 
iron. Beneath this atmospheric waving and curling, and 
partially beneath a thin layer of water, also, the whales 
were swimming. Seen in advance of all the other indi- 
cations, the puffs of vapour they spouted, seemed their 
forerunning couriers and detached flying outriders. 

All four bojits were now in keen pursuit of that one spot 
of troubled water and air. But it bade far to outstrip 
them ; it flew on and on, as a mass of interblending 
bubbles borne down a rapid stream from the hills. 

' Pull, pull, my good boys,' said Starbuck, in the lowest 
possible but intensest concentrated whisper to his men ; 
while the sharp fixed glance from his eyes darted straight 
ahead of the bow, almost seemed as two visible needles 
in two unerring binnacle compasses. He did not say much 
to his crew, though, nor did his crew say anything to him. 
Only the silence of the boat was at intervals startlingly 
pierced by one of his peculiar whispers, now harsh with 
command, now soft with entreaty. 

How different the loud little King-Post. ' Sing out 
and say something, my hearties. Roar and pull, my 
thunderbolts ! Beach me, beach me on their black backs, 



THE FIRST LOWERING 281 

boys ; only do that for me, and 1 11 sign over to you my 
Martha's Vineyard plantation, boys ; including wife and 
children, boys. Lay me on lay me on ! Lord, Lord ! 
but I shall go stark, staring mad ! See ! see that white 
water ! ' And so shouting, he pulled his hat from his 
head, and stamped up and down on it ; then picking it 
up, flirted it far off upon the sea ; and finally fell to 
rearing and plunging in the boat's stern like a crazed 
colt from the prairie. 

' Look at that chap now,' philosophically drawled 
Stubb, who, with his unlighted short pipe, mechanically 
retained between his teeth, at a short distance, followed 
after ' He 's got fits, that Flask has. Fits ? yes, give 
him fits that 's the very word pitch fits into 'em. 
Merrily, merrily, hearts -alive. Pudding for supper, you 
know ; merry 's the word. Pull, babes pull, sucklings 
pull, all. But what the devil are you hurrying about ? 
Softly, softly, and steadily, my men. Only pull, and keep 
pulling ; nothing more. Crack all your backbones, and 
bite your knives hi two that 's all. Take it easy why 
don't ye take it easy, I say, and burst all your livers and 
lungs ! ' 

But what it was that inscrutable Ahab said to that 
tiger-yellow crew of his these were words best omitted 
here ; for you live under the blessed light of the evangelical 
land. Only the infidel sharks in the audacious seas may 
give ear to such words, when, with tornado brow, and 
eyes of red murder, and foam-glued lips, Ahab leaped 
after his prey. 

Meanwhile, all the boats tore on. The repeated specific 
allusions of Flask to ' that whale,' as he called the fictitious 
monster which he declared to be incessantly tantalising 
his boat's bow with his tail these allusions of his were at 
times so vivid and lifelike, that they would cause some 
one or two of his men to snatch a fearful look over the 






282 MOBY-DICK 

shoulder. But this was against all rule ; for the oarsmen 
must put out their eyes, and ram a skewer through their 
necks ; usage pronouncing that they must have no 
organs but ears, and no limbs but arms, in these critical 
moments. 

It was a sight full of quick wonder and awe ! The vast 
swells of the omnipotent sea ; the surging, hollow roar 
they made, as they rolled along the eight gunwales, like 
gigantic bowls in a boundless bowling-green ; the brief 
suspended agony of the boat, as it would tip for an 
instant on the knife-like edge of the sharper waves, that 
almost seemed threatening to cut it in two ; the sudden 
profound dip into the watery glens and hollows ; the 
keen spurrings and goadings to gain the top of the opposite 
hill ; the headlong, sled-like slide down its other side ; 
all these, with the cries of the headsmen and harpooneers, 
and the shuddering gasps of the oarsmen, with the won- 
drous sight of the ivory Pequod bearing down upon her 
boats with outstretched sails, like a wild hen after her 
screaming brood ; all this was thrilling. Not the raw 
recruit, marching from the bosom of his wife into the fever- 
heat of his first battle ; not the dead man's ghost en- 
countering the first unknown phantom in the other world ; 
neither of these can feel stranger and stronger emotions 
than that man does, who for the first time finds himself 
pulling into the charmed, churned circle of the hunted 
sperm whale. 

The dancing white water made by the chase was now 
becoming more and more visible, owing to the increasing 
darkness of the dun cloud-shadows flung upon the sea. 
The jets of vapour no longer blended, but tilted every- 
where to right and left ; the whales seemed separating 
their wakes. The boats were pulled more apart ; Star- 
buck giving chase to three whales running dead to lee- 
ward. Our sail was now set, and, with the still rising 



THE FIRST LOWERING 283 

wind, we rushed along ; the boat going with such madness 
through the water, that the lee -oars could scarcely be 
worked rapidly enough to escape being torn from the 
rowlocks. 

Soon we were running through a suffusing wide veil of 
mist ; neither ship nor boat to be seen. 

4 Give way, men,' whispered Starbuck, drawing still 
further aft the sheet of his sail ; ' there is time to kill a 
fish yet before the squall comes. There 's white water 
again ! close to ! Spring ! * 

Soon after, two cries in quick succession on each side 
of us denoted that the other boats had got fast ; but 
hardly were they overheard, when with a lightning-like 
hurtling whisper Starbuck said : ' Stand up ! ' and Quee- 
queg, harpoon in hand, sprang to his feet. 

Though not one of the oarsmen was then facing the 
life and death peril so close to them ahead, yet with their 
eyes on the intense countenance of the mate in the stern 
of the boat, they knew that the imminent instant had 
come ; they heard, too, an enormous wallowing sound 
as of fifty elephants stirring in their litter. Meanwhile 
the boat was still booming through the mist, the waves 
curling and hissing around us like the erected crests of 
enraged serpents. 

' That 's his hump. There, there, give it to him ! ' 
whispered Starbuck. 

A short rushing sound leaped out of the boat ; it was 
the darted iron of Queequeg. Then all in one welded 
commotion came an invisible push from astern, while 
forward the boat seemed striking on a ledge ; the sail 
collapsed and exploded ; a gush of scalding vapour shot 
up near by ; something rolled and tumbled like an earth- 
quake beneath us. The whole crew were half suffocated 
as they were tossed helter-skelter into the white curdling 
cream of the squall. Squall, whale, and harpoon had all 



284 MOBY-DICK 

blended together ; and the whale, merely grazed by the 
iron, escaped. 

Though completely swamped, the boat was nearly 
unharmed. Swimming round it we picked up the floating 
oars, and lashing them across the gunwale, tumbled back 
to our places. There we sat up to our knees in the sea, 
the water covering every rib and plank, so that to our 
downward-gazing eyes the suspended craft seemed a coral 
boat grown up to us from the bottom of the ocean. 

The wind increased to a howl ; the waves dashed their 
bucklers together ; the whole squall roared, forked, and 
crackled around us like a white fire upon the prairie, in 
which, unconsumed, we were burning ; immortal in these 
jaws of death ! In vain we hailed the other boats ; as 
well roar to the live coals down the chimney of a flaming 
furnace as hail those boats in that storm. Meanwhile 
the driving scud, rack, and mist grew darker with the 
shadows of night ; no sign of the ship could be seen. 
The rising sea forbade all attempts to bale out the boat. 
The oars were useless as propellers, performing now the 
office of life-preservers. So, cutting the lashing of the 
waterproof match keg, after many failures Starbuck 
contrived to ignite the lamp in the lantern ; then stretch- 
ing it on a waif -pole, handed it to Queequeg as the standard- 
bearer of this forlorn hope. There, then, he sat, holding 
up that imbecile candle in the heart of that almighty 
forlornness. There, then, he sat, the sign and symbol 
of a man without faith, hopelessly holding up hope in 
the midst of despair. 

Wet, drenched through, and shivering cold, despairing 
of ship or boat, we lifted up our eyes as the dawn came on. 
The mist still spread over the sea, the empty lantern lay 
crushed in the bottom of the boat. Suddenly Queequeg 
started to his feet, hollowing his hand to his ear. We all 
heard a faint creaking, as of ropes and yards hitherto 



THE FIRST LOWERING 285 

muffled by the storm. The sound came nearer and 
nearer ; the thick mists were dimly parted by a huge, 
vague form. Affrighted, we all sprang into the sea as 
the ship at last loomed into view, bearing right down upon 
us within a distance of not much more than its length. 

Floating on the waves we saw the abandoned boat, as 
for one instant it tossed and gaped beneath the ship's 
bows like a chip at the base of a cataract ! and then the 
vast hull rolled over it, and it was seen no more till it 
came up weltering astern. Again we swam for it, were 
dashed against it by the seas, and were at last taken up 
and safely landed on board. Ere the squall came close 
to, the other boats had cut loose from their fish and 
returned to the ship in good time. The ship had given us 
up, but was still cruising, if haply it might light upon some 
token of our perishing, an oar or a lance pole. 



CHAPTER XL1X 

THE HYENA 

THERE are certain queer times and occasions in this 
strange mixed affair we call life when a man takes this 
whole universe for a vast practical joke, though the wit 
thereof he but dimly discerns, and more than suspects 
that the joke is at nobody's expense but his own. How- 
ever, nothing dispirits, and nothing seems worth while 
disputing. He bolts down all events, all creeds, and 
beliefs, and persuasions, all hard things visible and in- 
visible, never mind how knobby ; as an ostrich of potent 
digestion gobbles down bullets and gun flints. And as 
for small difficulties and worryings, prospects of sudden 
disaster, peril of life and limb ; all these, and death itself, 
seem to him only sly, good-natured hits, and jolly punches 
in the side bestowed by the unseen and unaccountable 
old joker. That odd sort of wayward mood I am speaking 
of, comes over a man only in some time of extreme tribu- 
lation ; it comes in the very midst of his earnestness, so 
that what just before might have seemed to him a thing 
most momentous, now seems but a part of the general 
joke. There is nothing like the perils of whaling to breed 
this free-and-easy sort of genial, desperado philosophy ; 
and with it I now regarded this whole voyage of the 
Pequod, and the great White Whale its object. 

' Queequeg/ said I, when they had dragged me, the 
}ast man, to the deck, and I was still shaking myself in 
my jacket to fling off the water ; ' Queequeg, my fine 
friend, does this sort of thing often happen ? ' Without 

286 



THE HYENA 287 

much emotion, though soaked through just like me, he 
gave me to understand that such things did often happen. 

4 Mr. Stubb,' said I, turning to that worthy, who, 
buttoned up in his oil-jacket, was now calmly smoking 
his pipe in the rain ; ' Mr. Stubb, I think I have heard you 
say that of all whalemen you ever met, our chief mate, 
Mr. Starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent. I 
suppose then, that going plump on a flying whale with your 
sail set in a foggy squall is the height of a whaleman's 
discretion ? ' 

1 Certain. I 've lowered for whales from a leaking 
ship in a gale off Cape Horn.' 

4 Mr. Flask,' said I, turning to little King-Post, who was 
standing close by ; ' you are experienced in these things, 
and I am not. Will you tell me whether it is an unalter- 
able law in this fishery, Mr. Flask, for an oarsman to break 
his own back pulling himself back-foremost into death's 
jaws ? ' 

' Can't you twist that smaller ? ' said Flask. ' Yes, 
that 's the law. I should like to see a boat's crew backing 
water up to a whale face foremost. Ha, ha ! the whale 
would give them squint for squint, mind that ! J 

Here then, from three impartial witnesses, I had a 
deliberate statement of the entire case. Considering, 
therefore, that squalls and capsizings in the water and 
consequent bivouacks on the deep, were matters of 
common -occurrence in this kind of life ; considering that 
at the superlatively critical instant of going on to the 
whale I must resign my life into the hands of him who 
steered the boat oftentimes a fellow who at that very 
moment is in his impetuousness upon the point of scuttling 
the craft with his own frantic stampings ; considering 
that the particular disaster to our own particular boat was 
chiefly to be imputed to Starbuck's driving on to his whale 
almost in the teeth of a squall, and considering that 



288 MOBY-DICK 

Starbuck, notwithstanding, was famous for his great 
heedfulness in the fishery ; considering that I belonged to 
this uncommonly prudent Starbuck 's boat ; and finally 
considering in what a devil's chase I was implicated, 
touching the White Whale : taking all things together, I 
say, I thought I might as well go below and make a rough 
draft of my will. ' Queequeg,' said I, ' come along, you 
shall be my lawyer, executor, and legatee/ 

It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be 
tinkering at their last wills and testaments, but there are 
no people in the world more fond of that diversion. This 
was the fourth time in my nautical life that I had done 
the same thing. After the ceremony was concluded upon 
the present occasion, I felt all the easier ; a stone was 
rolled away from my heart. Besides, all the days I should 
now live would be as good as the days that Lazarus lived 
after his resurrection ; a supplementary clean gain of so 
many months or weeks as the case might be. I survived 
myself ; my death and burial were locked up in my chest. 
I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly, like a quiet 
ghost with a clean conscience sitting inside the bars of a 
snug family vault. 

Now then, thought I, unconsciously rolling up the 
sleeves of my frock, here goes for a cool, collected dive 
at death and destruction, and the devil fetch the hindmost. 



CHAPTER L 
ARAB'S BOAT AND CREW. FEDALLAH 

* WHO would have thought it, Flask ! ' cried Stubb. ' If 
I had but one leg you would not catch me in a boat, unless 
maybe to stop the plug-hole with my timber toe. Oh ! 
he 's a wonderful old man ! ' 

' I don't think it so strange, after all, on that account,' 
said Flask. ' If his leg were off at the hip, now, it would 
be a different thing. That would disable him ; but he 
has one knee, and good part of the other left, you know.' 

' I don't know that, my little man ; I never yet saw 

him kneel.' 

******* 

Among whale -wise people it has often been argued 
whether, considering the paramount importance of his 
life to the success of the voyage, it is right for a whaling- 
captain to jeopardise that life in the active perils of the 
chase. So Tamerlane's soldiers often argued with tears 
in their eyes, whether that invaluable life of his ought to 
be carried into the thickest of the fight. 

But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect. 
Considering that with two legs man is but a hobbling 
wight in all times of danger ; considering that the pursuit 
of whales is always under great and extraordinary diffi- 
culties ; that every individual moment, indeed, then 
comprises a peril ; under these circumstances is it wise 
for any maimed man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt ? 
As a general thing, the joint-owners of the Pequod must 
have plainly thought not. 

VOL. I. T 



290 MOBY-DICK 

Ahab well knew that although his friends at home 
would think little of his entering a boat in certain com- 
paratively harmless vicissitudes of the chase, for the sake 
of being near the scene of action and giving his orders in 
person, yet for Captain Ahab to have a boat actually 
apportioned to him as a regular headsman in the hunt 
above all, for Captain Ahab to be supplied with five extra 
men, as that same boat's crew, he well knew that such 
generous conceits never entered the heads of the owners 
of the Pequod. Therefore he had not solicited a boat's 
crew from them, nor had he in any way hinted his desires 
on that head. Nevertheless he had taken private measure 
of his own touching all that matter. Until Cabaco's 
published discovery, the sailors had little foreseen it, 
though to be sure when, after being a little while out of 
port, all hands had concluded the customary business of 
fitting the whale-boats for service ; when some time after 
this Ahab was now and then found bestirring himself in 
the matter of making thole-pins with his own hands for 
what was thought to be one of the spare boats, and even 
solicitously cutting the small wooden skewers, which 
when the line is running out are pinned over the groove 
in the bow ; when all this was observed in him, and par- 
ticularly his solicitude hi having an extra coat of sheath- 
ing in the bottom of the boat, as if to make it better 
withstand the pointed pressure of his ivory limb ; and 
also the anxiety he evinced in exactly shaping the thigh - 
board, or clumsy cleat, as it is sometimes called, the hori- 
zontal piece in the boat's bow for bracing the knee against 
in darting or stabbing at the whale ; when it was observed 
how often he stood up in that boat with his solitary knee 
fixed in the semicircular depression in the cleat, and 
with the carpenter's chisel gouged out a little here and 
straightened it a little there ; all these things, I say, had 
awakened much interest and curiosity at the time. But 



FEDALLAH 291 

almost everybody supposed that this particular prepara- 
tive heedfulness in Ahab must only be with a view to the 
ultimate chase of Moby-Dick ; for he had already revealed 
his intention to hunt that mortal monster in person. But 
such a supposition did by no means involve the remotest 
suspicion as to any boat's crew being assigned to that 
boat. 

Now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder 
remained soon waned away ; for in a whaler wonders soon 
wane. Besides, now and then such unaccountable odds 
and ends of strange nations come up from the unknown 
nooks and ash-holes of the earth to man these floating 
outlaws of whalers ; and the ships themselves often pick 
up such queer castaway creatures found tossing about 
the open sea on planks, bits of wreck, oars, whale-boats, 
canoes, blown-off Japanese junks, and what not ; that 
Beelzebub himself might climb up the side and step down 
into the cabin to chat with the captain, and it would not 
create any unsubduable excitement in the forecastle. 

But be all this as it may, certain it is that while the 
subordinate phantoms soon found their place among the 
crew, though still as it were somehow distinct from them, 
yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah remained a muffled 
mystery to the last. Whence he came in a mannerly 
world like this, by what sort of unaccountable tie he soon 
evinced himself to be linked with Ahab's peculiar fortunes; 
nay, so far as to have some sort of a half -hinted influence ; 
Heaven knows, but it might have been even authority 
over him ; all this none knew. But one cannot sustain an 
indifferent air concerning Fedallah. He was such a 
creature as civilised, domestic people in the temperate 
zone only see in their dreams, and that but dimly ; but 
the like of whom now and then glide among the unchang- 
ing Asiatic communities, especially the oriental isles to 
the east of the continent those insulated, immemorial, 



292 MOBY-DICK 

unalterable countries, which even in these modern days 
still preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness of earth's 
primal generations, when the memory of the first man was 
a distinct recollection, and all men his descendants, un- 
knowing whence he came, eyed each other as real phan- 
toms, and asked of the sun and the moon why they were 
created and to what end ; when though, according to 
Genesis, the angels indeed consorted with the daughters 
of men, the devils also, add the uncanonical Rabbins, 
indulged in mundane amours. 



CHAPTER LI 

THE SPIRIT- SPOUT 

DAYS, weeks passed, and under easy sail, the ivory Pequod 
had slowly swept across four several cruising-grounds ; 
that off the Azores ; off the Cape de Verdes ; on the 
Plate (so called), being off the mouth of the Bio de la 
Plata ; and the Carrol ground, an unstaked, watery 
locality, southerly from St. Helena. 

It was while gliding through these latter waters that 
one serene and moonlight night, when all the waves rolled 
by like scrolls of silver ; and, by their soft, suffusing 
seethings, made what seemed a silvery silence, not a 
solitude : on such a silent night a silvery jet was seen far ,; 
in advance of the white bubbles at the bow. Lit up by I 
the moon, it looked celestial ; seemed some plumed and 
glittering god uprising from the sea. Fedallah first 
descried this jet. For of these moonlight nights, it was 
his wont to mount to the mainmast-head, and stand a 
look-out there, with the same precision as if it had been 
day. And yet, though herds of whales were seen by 
night, not one whalemen in a hundred would venture a 
lowering for them. You may think with what emotions, 
then, the seamen beheld this old Oriental perched aloft 
at such unusual hours ; his turban and the moon, com- 
panions in one sky. But when, after spending his uniform 
interval there for several successive nights without utter- 
ing a single sound ; when, after all this silence, his un- 
earthly voice was heard announcing that silvery, moon-lit 
jet, every reclining mariner started to his feet as if some 

293 



294 MOBY-DICK 

winged spirit had lighted in the rigging, and hailed the 
mortal crew. ' There she blows ! ' Had the trump of 
judgment blown, they could not have quivered more ; yet 
still they felt no terror ; rather pleasure. For though it 
was a most unwonted hour, yet so impressive was the cry, 
and so deliriously exciting, that almost every soul on 
board instinctively desired a lowering. 

Walking the deck with quick, side -lunging strides, 
Ahab commanded the t '-gallant-sails and royals to be set, 
and every stun' -sail spread. The best man in the ship 
must take the helm. Then, with every mast-head manned, 
the piled-up craft rolled down before the wind. The 
strange, upheaving, lifting tendency of the taffrail breeze 
filling the hollows of so many sails, made the buoyant, 
hovering deck to feel like air beneath the feet ; while 
still she rushed along, as if two antagonistic influences 
were struggling in her one to mount direct to heaven, 1 
the other to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal. H 
And had you watched Ahab's face that night, you would 
have thought that in him also two different things were 
warring. While his one live leg made lively echoes along 
the deck, every stroke of his dead limb sounded like a 
coffin-tap. On life and death this old man walked. But 
though the ship so swiftly sped, and though from every 
eye, like arrows, the eager glances shot, yet the silvery 
jet was no more seen that night. Every sailor swore 
he saw it once, but not a second time. 

This midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten 
thing, when, some days after, lo ! at the same silent hour, 
it was again announced : again it was descried by all ; 
but upon making sail to overtake it, once more it dis- 
appeared as if it had never been. And so it served us 
night after night, till no one heeded it but to wonder at 
it. Mysteriously jetted into the clear moonlight, or 
starlight, as the case might be ; disappearing again for 



THE SPIRIT-SPOUT 295 

one whole day, or two days, or three ; and somehow 
seeming at every distinct repetition to be advancing still 
further and further in our van, this solitary jet seemed 
forever alluring us on. 

Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race, 
and in accordance with the preternaturalness, as it seemed, 
which in many things invested the Pequod, were there 
wanting some of the seamen who swore that whenever 
and wherever descried ; at however remote times, or in 
however far apart latitudes and longitudes, that unnear- 
able spout was cast by one self-same whale ; and that 
whale, Moby-Dick. For a time, there reigned, too, a 
sense of peculiar dread at this flitting apparition, as if it 
were treacherously beckoning us on and on, in order that 
the monster might turn round upon us, and rend us at 
last in the remotest and most savage seas. 

These temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, 
derived a wondrous potency from the contrasting serenity 
of the weather, in which, beneath all its blue blandness, 
some thought there lurked a devilish charm, as for days 
and days we voyaged along, through seas so wearily, 
lonesomely mild, that all space, in repugnance to our 
vengeful errand, seemed vacating itself of life before our 
urn-like prow. 

But, at last, when turning to the eastward, the Cape 
winds began howling around us, and we rose and fell upon 
the long, troubled seas that are there ; when the ivory- 
tusked Pequod sharply bowed to the blast, and gored the 
dark waves in her madness, till, like showers of silver 
chips, the foam-flakes flew over her bulwarks ; then all 
this desolate vacuity of life went away, but gave place 
to sights more dismal than before. 

Close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted 
hither and thither before us ; while thick in our rear flew 
the inscrutable sea-ravens. And every morning, perched 



296 MOBY-DICK 

on our stays, rows of these birds were seen ; and spite 
of our hootings, for a long time obstinately clung to the 
hemp, as though they deemed our ship some drifting, 
uninhabited craft ; a thing appointed to desolation, and 
therefore fit roosting-place for their homeless selves. And 
heaved and heaved, still unrestingly heaved the black 
sea, as if its vast tides were a conscience ; and the great 
mundane soul were in anguish and remorse for the long 
sin and suffering it had bred. 

Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye ? Rather Cape 
Tormentoto, as called of yore ; for long allured by the 
perfidious silences that before had attended us, we found 
ourselves launched into this tormented sea, where guilty 
beings transformed into those fowls and these fish, 
seemed condemned to swim on everlastingly without any 
haven in store, or beat that black air without any horizon. 
But calm, snow-white, and unvarying ; still directing 
its fountain of feathers to the sky ; still beckoning us on 
from before, the solitary jet would at times be descried. 

During all this blackness of the elements, Ahab, though 
assuming for the time the almost continual command 
of the drenched and dangerous deck, manifested the 
gloomiest reserve ; and more seldom than ever addressed 
his mates. In tempestuous times like these, after every- 
thing above and aloft has been secured, nothing more 
can be done but passively to await the issue of the gale. 
Then captain and crew become practical fatalists. So, 
with his ivory leg inserted into its accustomed hole, and 
with one hand firmly grasping a shroud, Ahab for hours 
and hours would stand gazing dead to windward, while an 
occasional squall of sleet or snow would all but congeal 
his very eyelashes together. Meantime, the crew driven 
from the forward part of the ship by the perilous seas 
that burstingly broke over its bows, stood in a line along 
the bulwarks in the waist ; and the better to guard against 



THE SPIRIT-SPOUT 297 

the leaping waves, each man had slipped himself into a 
sort of bow-line secured to the rail, in which he swung as 
in a loosened belt. Few or no words were spoken ; and 
the silent ship, as if manned by painted sailors in wax, 
day after day tore on through all the swift madness and 
gladness of the demoniac waves. By night the same 
muteness of humanity before the shrieks of the ocean 
prevailed ; still in silence the men swung in the bow-lines ; 
still wordless Ahab stood up to the blast. Even when 
wearied nature seemed demanding repose, he would not 
seek that repose in his hammock. Never could Starbuck 
forget the old man's aspect, when one night going down 
into the cabin to mark how the barometer stood, he saw 
him with closed eyes sitting straight in his floor-screwed 
chair ; the rain and half-melted sleet of the storm from 
which he had some time before emerged, still slowly 
dripping from the unremoved hat and coat. On the table 
beside him lay unrolled one of those charts of tides and 
currents which have previously been spoken of. His 
lantern swung from his tightly clenched hand. Though 
the body was erect, the head was thrown back so that the 
closed eyes were pointed toward the needle of the tell- 
tale that swung from a beam in the ceiling. 1 

Terrible old man ! thought Starbuck with a shudder, 
sleeping in this gale, still thou steadfastly eyest thy 
purpose. 

1 The cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because, without going to 
the compass at the helm, the captain, while below, can inform himself of 
the course of the ship. 



CHAPTER LII 

THE ALBATROSS 

SOUTH-EASTWARD from the Cape, off the distant Crozetts, 
a good cruising -ground for right whalemen, a sail loomed 
ahead, the Goney (Albatross) by name. As she slowly 
drew nigh, from my lofty perch at the foremast -head, I 
had a good view of that sight so remarkable to a tyro in 
the far ocean fisheries a whaler at sea, and long absent 
from home. 

As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached 
like the skeleton of a stranded walrus. All down her 
sides, this spectral appearance was traced with long 
channels of reddened rust, while all her spars and her 
rigging were like the thick branches of trees furred over 
with hoar-frost. Only her lower sails were set. A wild 
sight it was to see her long-bearded look-outs at those 
three mast-heads. They seemed clad in the skins of beasts, 
so torn and bepatched the raiment that had survived 
nearly four years of cruising. Standing in iron hoops 
nailed to the mast, they swayed and swung over a fathom- 
less sea ; and though, when the ship slowly glided close 
under our stern, we six men in the air came so nigh to each 
other that we might almost have leaped from the mast- 
heads of one ship to those of the other ; yet, those for- 
lorn-looking fishermen, mildly eyeing us as they passed, 
said not one word to our own look-outs, while the quarter- 
deck hail was being heard from below. 

' Ship ahoy ! Have ye seen the White Whale ? ' 
But as the strange captain, leaning over the pallid 



THE ALBATROSS 299 

bulwarks, was in the act of putting his trumpet to his 
mouth, it somehow fell from his hand into the sea ; and 
the wind now rising amain, he in vain strove to make 
himself heard without it. Meantime, his ship was still 
increasing the distance between. While in various silent 
ways the seamen of the Pequod were evincing their observ- 
ance of this ominous incident at the first mere mention 
of the White Whale's name to another ship, Ahab for a 
moment paused ; it almost seemed as though he would 
have lowered a boat to board the stranger, had not the 
threatening wind forbade. But taking advantage of his 
windward position, he again seized his trumpet, and 
knowing by her aspect that the stranger vessel was a 
Nantucketer and shortly bound home, he loudly hailed 
' Ahoy there ! This is the Pequod, bound round the 
world ! Tell them to address all future letters to the 
Pacific Ocean ! and this time three years, if I am not at 
home, tell them to address them to ' 

At that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and 
instantly, then, in accordance with their singular ways, 
shoals of small harmless fish, that for some days before 
had been placidly swimming by our side, darted away 
with what seemed shuddering fins, and ranged themselves 
fore and aft with the stranger's flanks. Though in the 
course of his continual voyagings Ahab must often before 
have noticed a similar sight, yet, to any monomaniac 
man, the veriest trifles capriciously carry meanings. 

' Swim away from me, do ye ? ' murmured Ahab, 
gazing over into the water. There seemed but little in 
the words, but the tone conveyed more of deep helpless 
sadness than the insane old man had ever before evinced. 
But turning to the steersman, who thus far had been 
holding the ship in the wind to diminish her headway, 
he cried out in his old lion voice, ' Up helm ! Keep her 
off round the world ! ' 



300 



MOBY-DICK 



Round the world ! There is much in that sound to 
inspire proud feelings ; but whereto does all that circum- 
navigation conduct ? Only through numberless perils 
to the very point whence we started, where those that we 
left behind secure, were all the time before us. 

Were this world an endless plain, and by sailing east- 
ward we could forever reach new distances, and discover 
sights more sweet and strange than any Cyclades or Islands 
of King Solomon, then there were promise in the voyage. 
But in pursuit of those far mysteries we dream of, or in 
tormented chase of that demon phantom that, some time 
or other, swims before all human hearts ; while chasing 
such over this round globe, they either lead us on in 
barren mazes or midway leave us whelmed. 



CHAPTER LIII 

THE GAM 

THE ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the 
whaler we had spoken was this : the wind and sea be- 
tokened storms. But even had this not been the case, 
he would not after all, perhaps, have boarded her judging 
by his subsequent conduct on similar occasions if so it 
had been that, by the process of hailing, he had obtained 
a negative answer to the question he put. For, as it 
eventually turned out, he cared not to consort, even for 
five minutes, with any stranger captain, except he could 
contribute some of that information he so absorbingly 
sought. But all this might remain inadequately esti- 
mated, were not something said here of the peculiar usages 
of whaling-vessels wlfen meeting each other in foreign 
seas, and especially on a common cruising-ground. 

If two strangers crossing the Pine Barrens in New York 
State, or the equally desolate Salisbury Plain in England ; 
if casually encountering each other in such inhospitable 
wilds, these twain, for the life of them, cannot well avoid 
a mutual salutation ; and stopping for a moment to 
interchange the news ; and, perhaps, sitting down for a 
while and resting in concert : then, how much more natural 
that upon the illimitable Pine Barrens and Salisbury Plains 
of the sea, two whaling-vessels descrying each other at the 
ends of the earth off lone Fanning 's Island, or the far 
away King's Mills ; how much more natural, I say, 
that under such circumstances these ships should not only 
interchange hails, but come into still closer, more friendly 
and sociable contact. And especially would this seem to 

901 



302 MOBY-DICK 

be a matter of course, in the case of vessels owned in one 
seaport, and whose captains, officers, and not a few of the 
men are personally known to each other ; and consequently, 
have all sorts of dear domestic things to talk about. 

For the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, per- 
haps, has letters on board ; at any rate, she will be sure 
to let her have some papers of a date a year or two later 
than the last one on her blurred and thumb-worn files. 
And in return for that courtesy, the outward-bound ship 
would receive the latest whaling intelligence from the 
cruising-ground to which she may be destined, a thing of 
the utmost importance to her. And in degree, all this 
will hold true concerning whaling-vessels crossing each 
other's track on the cruising-ground itself, even though 
they are equally long absent from home. For one of them 
may have received a transfer of letters from some third, 
and now far remote vessel ; and some of those letters 
may be for the people of the ship she now meets. Besides, 
they would exchange the whaling news, and have an 
agreeable chat. For not only would they meet with all 
the sympathies of sailors, but likewise with all the peculiar 
congenialities arising from a common pursuit and mutually 
shared privations and perils. 

Nor would difference of country make any very essential 
difference ; that is, so long as both parties speak one lan- 
guage, as is the case with Americans and English. 
Though, to be sure, from the small number of English 
whalers, such meetings do not very often occur, and when 
they do occur there is too apt to be a sort of shyness 
between them ; for your Englishman is rather reserved, 
and your Yankee, he does not fancy that sort of thing 
in anybody but himself. Besides, the English whalers 
sometimes affect a kind of metropolitan superiority over 
the American whalers ; regarding the long, lean Nan- 
tucketer, with his nondescript provincialisms, as a sort 
of sea-peasant. But where this superiority in the English 



THE GAM 303 

whalemen does really consist, it would be hard to say, 
seeing that the Yankees in one day, collectively, kill more 
whales than all the English, collectively, in ten years. 
But this is a harmless little foible in the English whale- 
hunters, which the Nantucketer does not take much to 
heart ; probably, because he knows that he has a few 
foibles himself. 

So, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the 
sea, the whalers have most reason to be sociable and 
they are so. Whereas, some merchant ships crossing 
each other's wake in the mid- Atlantic, will oftentimes 
pass on without so much as a single word of recognition, 
mutually cutting each other on the high seas, like a brace 
of dandies in Broadway ; and all the time indulging, 
perhaps, in finical criticism upon each other's rig. As 
for men-of-war, when they chance to meet at sea, they 
first go through such a string of silly bowings and scrapings, 
such a ducking of ensigns, that there does not seem to be 
much right-down hearty goodwill and brotherly love 
about it at all. As touching slave-ships meeting, why, they 
are in such a prodigious hurry, they run away from each 
other as soon as possible. And as for pirates, when they 
chance to cross each other's cross-bones, the first hail is, 
' How many skulls ? ' the same way that whalers hail 
' How many barrels ? ' And that question once answered, 
pirates straightway steer apart, for they are infernal 
villains on both sides, and don't like to see overmuch of 
each other's villainous likenesses. 

But look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hos- 
pitable, sociable, free-and-easy whaler ! What does the 
whaler do when she meets another whaler in any sort of 
decent weather ? She has a ' Gam,' a thing so utterly 
unknown to all other ships that they never heard of the 
name even ; and if by chance they should hear of it, they 
only grin at it, and repeat gamesome stuff about 'spouters' 
and c blubber-boilers,' and such like pretty exclamations. 



304 MOBY-DICK 

Why it is that all merchant seamen, and also all pirates 
and man-of-war's men, and slave-ship sailors, cherish 
such a scornful feeling toward whale-ships ; this is a 
question it would be hard to answer. Because, in the 
case of pirates, say, I should like to know whether that 
profession of theirs has any peculiar glory about it. It 
sometimes ends in uncommon elevation, indeed ; but only 
at the gallows. And besides, when a man is elevated in 
that odd fashion, he has no proper foundation for his 
superior altitude. Hence, I conclude, that in boasting 
himself to be high lifted above a whaleman, in that 
assertion the pirate has no solid basis to stand on. 

But what is a Gam ? You might wear out your index 
finger running up and down the columns of dictionaries, 
and never find the word. Dr. Johnson never attained 
to that erudition ; Noah Webster's ark does not hold it. 
Nevertheless, this same expressive word has now for 
many years been in constant use among some fifteen 
thousand true-born Yankees. Certainly, it needs a 
definition, and should be incorporated into the Lexicon. 
With that view, let me learnedly define it. 

GAM. NOUN A social meeting of two (or more) 
whale-ships, generally on a cruising-ground ; when, after 
exchanging hails, they exchange visits by boats' crews : the 
two captains remaining, for the time, on board of one ship t 
and the two chief mates on the other. 

There is another little item about Gamming which must 
not be forgotten here. All professions have their own 
little peculiarities of detail ; so has the whale-fishery. In 
a pirate, man-of-war, or slave-ship, when the captain 
is rowed anywhere hi his boat, he always sits in the stern- 
sheets on a comfortable, sometimes cushioned seat there, 
and often steers himself with a pretty little milliner's 
tiller decorated with gay cords and ribbons. But the 
whale-boat has no seat astern, no sofa of that sort what- 



THE GAM 305 

ever, and no tiller at all. High times indeed, if whaling- 
captains were wheeled about the water on castors like 
gouty old aldermen in patent chairs. And as for a tiller, 
the whale-boat never admits of any such effeminacy ; and 
therefore as in gamming a complete boat's crew must 
leave the ship, and hence as the boat steerer or harpooneer 
is of the number, that subordinate is the steersman upon 
the occasion, and the captain, having no place to sit in, 
is pulled off to his visit all standing like a pine-tree. And 
often you will notice that being conscious of the eyes of 
the whole visible world resting on him from the sides of 
the two ships, this standing captain is all alive to the 
importance of sustaining his dignity by maintaining his 
legs. Nor is this any very easy matter ; for in his rear 
is the immense projecting steering-oar hitting him now 
and then in the small of his back, the after-oar reciprocat- 
ing by rapping his knees in front. He is thus completely 
wedged before and behind, and can only expand himself 
sideways by settling down on his stretched legs ; but a 
sudden, violent pitch of the boat will often go far to topple 
him, because length of foundation is nothing without 
corresponding breadth. Merely make a spread angle of 
two poles, and you cannot stand them up. Then, again, 
it would never do in plain sight of the world's riveted 
eyes, it would never do, I say, for this straddling captain 
to be seen steadying himself the slightest particle by 
catching hold of anything with his hands ; indeed, as 
token of his entire, buoyant self-command, he generally 
carries his hands in his trowsers' pockets ; but perhaps 
being generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them 
there for ballast. Nevertheless there have occurred 
instances, well authenticated ones too, where the captain 
has been known for an uncommonly critical moment or 
two, in a sudden squall, say to seize hold of the nearest 
oarsman's hair, and hold on there like grim death. 
VOL. i. u 



CHAPTER L1V 

THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 

(As told at the Golden Inn.) 

THE Cape of Good Hope, and all the watery region round 
about there, is much like some noted four corners of a 
great highway, where you meet more travellers than in 
any other part. 

It was not very long after speaking the Goney that 
another homeward-bound whaleman, the Town-Ho? was 
encountered. She was manned almost wholly by Poly- 
nesians. In the short gam that ensued she gave us strong 
news of Moby-Dick. To some the general interest in the 
White Whale was now wildly heightened by a circumstance 
of the Town-Ho' s story, which seemed obscurely to in- 
volve with the whale a certain wondrous, inverted visi- 
tation of one of those so-called judgments of God which 
at times are said to overtake some men. This latter 
circumstance, with its own particular accompaniments, 
forming what may be called the secret part of the tragedy 
about to be narrated, never reached the ears of Captain 
Ahab or his mates. For that secret part of the story was 
unknown to the captain of the Town-Ho himself. It was 
the private property of three confederate white seamen 
of that ship, one of whom, it seems, communicated it to 
Tashtego with Romish injunctions of secrecy, but the 
following night Tashtego rambled in his sleep, 

1 The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the mast-1 
still used by \vhalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagos terrapin. 
306 



THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 307 

revealed so much of it in that way, that when he was 
wakened he could not well withhold the rest. Neverthe- 
less, so potent an influence did this thing have on those 
seamen in the Pequod who came to the full knowledge of 
it, and by such a strange delicacy, to call it so, were they 
governed in this matter, that they kept the secret among 
themselves so that it never transpired abaft the Peqiwd's 
mainmast. Interweaving in its proper place this darker 
thread with the story as publicly narrated on the ship, 
the whole of this strange affair I now proceed to put on 
lasting record. 

For my humour's sake, I shall preserve the style in 
which I once narrated it at Lima, to a lounging circle of 
my Spanish friends, one saint's eve, smoking upon the 
thick-gilt tiled piazza of the Golden Inn. Of those fine 
cavaliers, the young Dons, Pedro and Sebastian, were on 
the closer terms with me ; and hence the interluding 
questions they occasionally put, and which are duly 
answered at the time. 

4 Some two years prior to my first learning the events 
which I am about rehearsing to you, gentlemen, the Town- 
Ho, sperm whaler of Nantucket, was cruising in your 
Pacific here, not very many days' sail westward from the 
eaves of this good Golden Inn. She was somewhere 
to the northward of the Line. One morning upon hand- 
ling the pumps, according to daily usage, it was observed 
that she made more water in her hold than common. 
They supposed a sword-fish had stabbed her, gentlemen. 
But the captain, having some unusual reason for believing 
that rare good luck awaited him in those latitudes, and 
therefore being very averse to quit them ; and the leak 
not being then considered at all dangerous, though, 
indeed, they could not find it after searching the hold as 
low down as was possible in rather heavy weather ; the 
ship still continued her cruisings, the mariners working 



308 MOBY-DICK 

at the pumps at wide and easy intervals ; but no good luck 
came ; more days went by, and not only was the leak yet 
undiscovered, but it sensibly increased. So much so, 
that now taking some alarm, the captain, making all sail, 
stood away for the nearest harbour among the islands, 
there to have his hull hove out and repaired. 

4 Though no small passage was before her, yet, if the 
commonest chance favoured, he did not at all fear that 
his ship would founder by the way, because his pumps 
were of the best, and being periodically relieved at them, 
those six-and-thirty men of his could easily keep the ship 
free ; never mind if the leak should double on her. In 
truth, well-nigh the whole of this passage being attended 
by very prosperous breezes, the Town-Ho had all but 
certainly arrived in perfect safety at her port without 
the occurrence of the least fatality, had it not been for the 
brutal overbearing of Radney, the mate, a Vineyarder, and 
the bitterly provoked vengeance of Steelkilt, a Lakeman 
and desperado from Buffalo. 

' " Lakeman ! Buffalo ! Pray, what is a Lakeman, 
and where is Buffalo ? " said Don Sebastian, rising in his 
swinging mat of grass. 

' On the eastern shore of our Lake Erie, Don ; but 
I crave your courtesy maybe, you shall soon hear 
further of all that. Now, gentlemen, in square-sail brigs 
and three-masted ships, well-nigh as large and stout as 
any that ever sailed out of your old Callao to far Manilla ; 
this Lakeman, in the land-locked heart of our America, 
had yet been nurtured by all those agrarian freebooting 
impressions popularly connected with the open ocean. 
For in their interflowing aggregate, those grand fresh- 
water seas of ours, Erie, and Ontario, and Huron, and 
Superior, and Michigan, possess an ocean -like expansive- 
ness, with many of the ocean's noblest traits ; with many 
of its rimmed varieties of races and of climes. They 



THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 309 

contain round archipelagoes of romantic isles, even as the 
Polynesian waters do ; in large part, are shored by two 
great contrasting nations, as the Atlantic is ; they furnish 
long maritime approaches to our numerous territorial 
colonies from the East, dotted all round their banks ; ; 
here and there are frowned upon by batteries, and by 
the goat-like craggy guns of lofty Mackinaw ; they have 
heard the fleet thunderings of naval victories ; at intervals 
they yield their beaches to wild barbarians, whose red- 
painted faces flash from out their peltry wigwams ; for 
leagues and leagues are flanked by ancient and unentered 
forests, where the gaunt pines stand like serried lines of 
kings in Gothic genealogies ; those same woods harbour- 
ing wild Afric beasts of prey, and silken creatures whose 
exported furs give robes to Tartar emperors ; they mirror 
the paved capitals of Buffalo and Cleveland, as well as 
Winnebago villages ; they float alike the full-rigged 
merchant ship, the armed cruiser of the State, the steamer, 
and the beech canoe ; they are swept by Borean and dis- 
masting blasts as direful as any that lash the salted wave ; 
they know what shipwrecks are, for out of sight of land, 
however inland, they have drowned full many a midnight 
ship with all its shrieking crew. Thus, gentlemen, though 
an inlander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild- 
ocean nurtured ; as much of an audacious mariner as 
any. And for Radney, though in his infancy he may have 
laid him down on the lone Nantucket beach, to nurse at 
his maternal sea ; though in after life he had long followed 
our austere Atlantic and your contemplative Pacific ; yet 
was he quite as vengeful and full of social quarrel as the 
backwoods seaman, fresh from the latitudes of buck-horn 
handled bowie-knives. Yet was this Nantucketer a man 
with some good-hearted traits ; and this Lakeman, a 
mariner, who though a sort of devil indeed, might yet by 
inflexible firmness, only tempered by that common 



310 MOBY-DICK 

decency of human recognition which is the meanest 
slave's right ; thus treated, this Steelkilt had long been 
retained harmless and docile. At all events, he had 
proved so thus far ; but Radney was doomed and made 
mad, and Steelkilt but, gentlemen, you shall hear. 

' It was not more than a day or two at the furthest 
after pointing her prow for her island haven, that the 
Town-Ho's leak seemed again increasing, but only so as 
to require an hour or more at the pumps every day. You 
must know that in a settled and civilised ocean like our 
Atlantic, for example, some skippers think little of pump- 
ing their whole way across it ; though of a still, sleepy 
night, should the officer of the deck happen to forget his 
duty in that respect, the probability would be that he 
and his shipmates would never again remember it, on 
account of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom. Nor 
in the solitary and savage seas far from you to the west- 
ward, gentlemen, is it altogether unusual for ships to 
keep clanging at their pump-handles in full chorus even 
for a voyage of considerable length ; that is, if it lie along 
a tolerably accessible coast, or if any other reasonable 
retreat is afforded them. It is only when a leaky vessel 
is in some very out-of-the-way part of those waters, some 
really landless latitude, that her captain begins to feel 
a little anxious. 

' Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho \ so 
when her leak was found gaining once more, there was 
in truth some small concern manifested by several of her 
company ; especially by Radney the mate. He com- 
manded the upper sails to be well hoisted, sheeted home 
anew, and every way expanded to the breeze. Now this 
Radney, I suppose, was as little of a coward, and as little 
inclined to any sort of nervous apprehensiveness touching 
his own person, as any fearless, unthinking creature on 
land or on sea that you can conveniently imagine, gentle- 



THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 311 

men. Therefore when he betrayed this solicitude about 
the safety of the ship, some of the seamen declared that 
it was only on account of his being a part owner in her. 
So when they were working that evening at the pumps, 
there was on this head no small gamesomeness slyly going 
on among them, as they stood with their feet continually 
overflowed by the rippling clear water clear as any 
mountain spring, gentlemen that bubbling from the 
pumps ran across the deck, and poured itself out in steady 
spouts at the lee scupper-holes. 

4 Now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case hi 
this conventional world of ours watery or otherwise ; 
that when a person placed in command over his fellow- 
men finds one of them to be very significantly his superior 
in general pride of manhood, straightway against that 
man he conceives an unconquerable dislike and bitterness ; 
and if he have a chance he will pull down and pulverise that 
subaltern's tower, and make a little heap of dust of it. 
Be this conceit of mine as it may, gentlemen, at all events 
Steelkilt was a tall and noble animal with a head like a 
Roman, and a flowing golden beard like the tasselled 
housings of your last viceroy's snorting charger ; and a 
brain, and a heart, and a soul in him, gentlemen, which 
had made Steelkilt Charlemagne, had he been born son 
to Charlemagne's father. But Radney, the mate, was 
ugly as a mule ; yet as hardy, as stubborn, as malicious. 
He did not love Steelkilt, and Steelkilt knew it. 

' Espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at 
the pump with the rest, the Lakeman affected not to 
notice him, but unawed, went on with his gay banterings. 

' " Ay, ay, my merry lads, it 's a lively leak this ; 
hold a cannikin, one of ye, and let 's have a taste. By the 
Lord, it 's worth bottling ! I tell ye what, men, old Rad's 
investment must go for it ! he had best cut away his part 
of the hull and tow it home. The fact is, boys, that sword- 



312 MOBY-DICK 

fish only began the job ; he 's come back again with a 
gang of ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and file-fish, and what 
not ; and the whole posse of 'em are now hard at work 
cutting and slashing at the bottom ; making improve- 
ments, I suppose. If old Rad were here now, I 'd tell 
him to jump overboard and scatter 'em. They 're play- 
ing the devil with his estate, I can tell him. But he 's a 
simple old soul, Rad, and a beauty too. Boys, they say 
the rest of his property is invested in looking-glasses. I 
wonder if he 'd give a poor devil like me the model of his 
nose." 

' " Damn your eyes ! what 's that pump stopping f or ? " 
roared Radney, pretending not to have heard the sailors' 
talk. " Thunder away at it ! " 

" Ay, ay, sir," said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket. 
" Lively, boys, lively, now ! " And with that the pump 
clanged like fifty fire-engines ; the men tossed their hats 
off to it, and ere long that peculiar gasping of the lungs 
was heard which denotes the fullest tension of life's 
utmost energies. 

' Quitting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, 
the Lakeman went forward all panting, and sat himself 
down on the windlass ; his face fiery red, his eyes blood- 
shot, and wiping the profuse sweat from his brow. Now 
what cozening fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessed 
Radney to meddle with such a man in that corporeally 
exasperated state, I know not ; but so it happened. In- 
tolerably striding along the deck, the mate commanded 
him to get a broom and sweep down the planks, and also 
a shovel, and remove some offensive matters consequent 
upon allowing a pig to run at large. 

' Now, gentlemen, sweeping a ship's deck at sea is a 
piece of household work which in all times but raging 
gales is regularly attended to every evening ; it has been 
known to be done in the case of ships actually foundering 



THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 313 

at the time. Such, gentlemen, is the inflexibility of sea- 
usages and the instinctive love of neatness in seamen ; 
some of whom would not willingly drown without first 
washing their faces. But in all vessels this broom business 
is the prescriptive province of the boys, if boys there be 
aboard. Besides, it was the stronger men in the Town-Ho 
that had been divided into gangs, taking turns at the 
pumps ; and being the most athletic seaman of them all, 
Steelkilt had been regularly assigned captain of one of 
the gangs ; consequently he should have been freed from 
any trivial business not connected with truly nautical 
duties, such being the case with his comrades. I mention 
all these particulars so that you may understand exactly 
how this affair stood between the two men. 

' But there was more than this : the order about the 
shovel was almost as plainly meant to sting and insult 
Steelkilt, as though Radney had spat in his face. Any 
man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will understand 
this ; and all this and doubtless much more, the Lakeman 
fully comprehended when the mate uttered his command. 
But as he sat still for a moment, and as he steadfastly 
looked into the mate's malignant eye and perceived the 
stacks of powder-casks heaped up in him and the slow- 
match silently burning along toward them ; as he in- 
stinctively saw all this, that strange forbearance and un- 
willingness to stir up the deeper passionateness in any 
already ireful being a repugnance most felt, when felt 
at all, by really valiant men even when aggrieved this 
nameless phantom feeling, gentlemen, stole over Steelkilt. 

' Therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a little broken 
by the bodily exhaustion he was temporarily in, he an- 
swered him saying that sweeping the deck was not his 
business, and he would not do it. And then, without at 
all alluding to the shovel, he pointed to three lads as the 
customary sweepers ; who, not being billeted at the 



314 MOBY-DICK 

pumps, had done little or nothing all day. To this, 
Radney replied with an oath, in a most domineering and 
outrageous manner unconditionally reiterating his com- 
mand ; meanwhile advancing upon the still seated Lake- 
man, with an uplifted cooper's club hammer which he had 
snatched from a cask near by. 

' Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil 
at the pumps, for all his first nameless feeling of forbear- 
ance the sweating Steelkilt could but ill brook this bearing 
in the mate ; but somehow still smothering the conflagra- 
tion within him, without speaking he remained doggedly 
rooted to his seat, till at last the incensed Radney shook 
the hammer within a few inches of his face, furiously 
commanding him to do his bidding. 

4 Steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating round the wind- 
lass, steadily followed by the mate with his menacing 
hammer, deliberately repeated his intention not to obey. 
Seeing, however, that his forbearance had not the slightest 
effect, by an awful and unspeakable intimation with his 
twisted hand he warned off the foolish and infatuated 
man ; but it was to no purpose. And in this way the 
two went once slowly round the windlass ; when, resolved 
at last no longer to retreat, bethinking him that he had 
now forborne as much as comported with his humour, 
the Lakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to 
the officer : 

1 " Mr. Radney, I will not obey you. Take that 
hammer away, or look to yourself." But the predestin- 
ated mate coming still closer to him, where the Lakeman 
stood fixed, now shook the heavy hammer within an inch 
of his teeth ; meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable 
maledictions. Retreating not the thousandth part of an 
inch ; stabbing him in the eye with the unflinching 
poniard of his glance, Steelkilt, clenching his right hand 
behind him and creepingly drawing it back, told his perse- 



THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 315 

cutor that if the hammer but grazed his cheek he (Steel- 
kilt) would murder him. But, gentlemen, the fool had 
been branded for the slaughter by the gods. Immediately 
the hammer touched the cheek ; the next instant the 
lower jaw of the mate was stove in his head ; he fell on 
the hatch spouting blood like a whale. 

* Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of 
the backstays leading far aloft to where two of his com- 
rades were standing their mast-heads. They were both 
Canallers. 

' " Canallers ! " cried Don Pedro. " We have seen 
many whale -ships in our harbours, but never heard of 
your Canallers. Pardon : who and what are they ? " 

' " Canallers, Don, are the boatmen belonging to our 
grand Erie Canal. You must have heard of it." 

' " Nay, Senor ; hereabouts in this dull, warm, most 
lazy, and hereditary land, we know but little of your 
vigorous North." 

' " Ay ? Well then, Don, refill my cup. Your 
chicha 's very fine ; and ere proceeding further I will tell 
ye what our Canallers are ; for such information may 
throw side-light upon my story." 

4 For three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through 
the entire breadth of the state of New York ; through 
numerous populous cities and most thriving villages ; 
through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps, and affluent, 
cultivated fields, unrivalled for fertility ; by billiard- 
room and bar-room ; through the holy-of-holies of great 
forests ; on Roman arches over Indian rivers ; through 
sun and shade ; by happy hearts or broken ; through 
all the wide contrasting scenery of those noble Mohawk 
counties ; and especially, by rows of snow-white chapels, 
whose spires stand almost like milestones, flows one con- 
tinual stream of Venetianly corrupt and often lawless life. 
There 's your true Ashantee, gentlemen ; there howl your 



316 MOBY-DICK 

pagans ; where you ever find them, next door to you ; 
under the long-flung shadow, and the snug patronising 
lee of churches. For by some curious fatality, as it is 
often noted of your metropolitan freebooters that they 
ever encamp around the halls of justice, so sinners, gentle- 
men, most abound in holiest vicinities. 

4 " Is that a friar passing ? " said Don Pedro, looking 
downward into the crowded plaza, with humorous 
concern. 

' " Well for our northern friend, Dame Isabella's In- 
quisition wanes in Lima," laughed Don Sebastian. " Pro- 
ceed, Senor." 

' " A moment ! Pardon ! " cried another of the com- 
pany. " In the name of all us Limeese, I but desire to 
express to you, sir sailor, that we have by no means over- 
looked your delicacy in not substituting present Lima 
for distant Venice in your corrupt comparison. Oh ! do 
not bow and look surprised ; you know the proverb all 
along this coast 'Corrupt as Lima.' It but bears out 
your saying, too ; churches more plentiful than billiard- 
tables, and forever open and ' Corrupt as Lima.' So, 
too, Venice ; I have been there ; the holy city of the 
blessed evangelist, St. Mark ! St. Dominic, purge it ! 
Your cup ! Thanks : here I refill ; now, you pour out 
again." 

1 Freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the 
Canaller would make a fine dramatic hero, so abundantly 
and picturesquely wicked is he. Like Mark Antony, for 
days and days along his green-turfed, flowery Nile, he 
indolently floats, openly toying with his red-cheeked 
Cleopatra, ripening his apricot thigh upon the sunny deck. 
But ashore, all this effeminacy is dashed. The brigandish 
guise which the Canaller so proudly sports, his slouched 
and gaily -ribboned hat, betoken his grand features. A 
terror to the smiling innocence of the villages through 



THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 317 

which he floats ; his swart visage and bold swagger are 
not unshunned in cities. Once a vagabond on his own 
canal, I have received good turns from one of these 
Canallers ; I thank him heartily ; would fain be not 
ungrateful ; but it is often one of the prime redeeming 
qualities of your man of violence, that at times he has 
as stiff an arm to back a poor stranger in a strait, as to 
plunder a wealthy one. In sum, gentlemen, what the 
wildness of this canal life is, is emphatically evinced by 
this ; that our wild whale-fishery contains so many of 
its most finished graduates, and that scarce any race of 
mankind, except Sydney men, are so much distrusted by 
our whaling-captains. Nor does it at all diminish the 
curiousness of this matter, that to many thousands of our 
rural boys and young men born along its line, the pro- 
bationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole tran- 
sition between quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field, 
and recklessly ploughing the waters of the most barbaric 
seas. 

' " I see ! I see ! " impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro, 
spilling his chicha upon his silvery ruffles. " No need to 
travel ! The world 5 s one Lima. I had thought, now, 
that at your temperate North the generations were cold 
and holy as the hills. But the story." 

' I left off, gentlemen, where the Lakeman shook the 
backstay. Hardly had he done so, when he was sur- 
rounded by the three junior mates and the four har- 
pooneers, who all crowded him to the deck. But sliding 
down the ropes like baleful comets, the two Canallers 
rushed into the uproar, and sought to drag their man out 
of it toward the forecastle. Others of the sailors joined 
with them in this attempt, and a twisted turmoil ensued ; 
while standing out of harm's way, the valiant captain 
danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling upon his 
officers to manhandle that atrocious scoundrel, and smoke 



318 MOBY-DICK 

him along to the quarter-deck. At intervals, he ran close 
up to the revolving border of the confusion, and prying 
into the heart of it with his pike, sought to prick out the 
object of his resentment. But Steelkilt and his desper- 
adoes were too much for them all ; they succeeded in 
gaining the forecastle deck, where, hastily slewing about 
three or four large casks in a line with the windlass, these 
sea-Parisians entrenched themselves behind the barricade. 

' " Come out of that, ye pirates ! " roared the captain, 
now menacing them with a pistol in each hand, just 
brought to him by the steward. " Come out of that, ye 
cut -throats ! " 

' Steelkilt leaped on the barricade, and striding up and 
down there, defied the worst the pistols could do ; but 
gave the captain to understand distinctly, that his (Steel- 
kilt's) death would be the signal for a murderous mutiny 
on the part of all hands. Fearing in his heart lest this 
might prove but too true, the captain a little desisted, but 
still commanded the insurgents instantly to return to 
their duty. 

' " Will you promise not to touch us, if we do ? " 
demanded their ringleader. 

' " Turn to ! turn to ! I make no promise ; to your 
duty ! Do you want to sink the ship, by knocking off 
at a time like this ? Turn to ! " and he once more raised 
a pistol. 

' " Sink the ship ! " cried Steelkilt. " Ay, let her 
sink. Not a man of us turns to, unless you swear not to 
raise a rope-yarn against us. What say ye, men 1 " 
turning to his comrades. A fierce cheer was their response. 

' The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the 
while keeping his eye on the captain, and jerking out such 
sentences as these : "It 's not our fault ; we didn't 
want it ; I told him to take his hammer away ; it was 
boy 3 s business ; he might have known me before this ; 



THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 319 

I told him not to prick the buffalo ; I believe I have broken 
a finger here against his cursed jaw ; ain't those mincing- 
knives down in the forecastle there, men ? look to those 
handspikes, my hearties. Captain, by God, look to 
yourself ; say the word ; don't be a fool ; forget it all ; 
we are ready to turn to ; treat us decently, and we 're 
your men ; but we won't be flogged." 

' " Turn to ! I make no promises, turn to, I say ! " 

' " Look ye, now," cried the Lake man, flinging out his 
arm toward him, " there are a few of us here (and I am 
one of them) who have shipped for the cruise, d' ye see ; 
now as you well know, sir, we can claim our discharge as 
soon as the anchor is down ; so we don't want a row ; it 's 
not our interest ; we want to be peaceable ; we are ready 
to work, but we won't be flogged." 

' " Turn to ! " roared the captain. 

* Steelkilt glanced round him a moment, and then 
said : " I tell you what it is now, captain, rather than 
kill ye, and be hung for such a shabby rascal, we won't 
lift a hand against ye unless ye attack us ; but till you 
say the word about not flogging us, we don't do a hand's 
turn." 

6 " Down into the forecastle then, down with ye, I '11 
keep ye there till ye 're sick of it. Down ye go." 

' " Shall we ? " cried the ringleader to his men. Most 
of them were against it ; but at length, in obedience to 
Steelkilt, they preceded him down into their dark den, 
growlingly disappearing, like bears into a cave. 

' As the Lakeman's bare head was just level with the 
planks, the captain and his posse leaped the barricade, 
and rapidly drawing over the slide of the scuttle, planted 
their group of hands upon it, and loudly called for the 
steward to bring the heavy brass padlock belonging to the 
companion-way. Then opening the slide a little, the 
captain whispered something down the crack, closed it, 



320 MOBY-DICK 

and turned the key upon them ten in number leaving 
on deck some twenty or more, who thus far had remained 
neutral. 

' All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the 
officers, forward and aft, especially about the forecastle 
scuttle and fore-hatchway : at which last place it was 
feared the insurgents might emerge, after breaking through 
the bulkhead below. But the hours of darkness passed 
in peace ; the men who still remained at their duty toiling 
hard at the pumps, whose clinking and clanking at inter- 
vals through the dreary night dismally resounded through 
the ship. 

' At sunrise the captain went forward, and knocking 
on the deck, summoned the prisoners to work ; but with 
a yell they refused. Water was then lowered down to 
them, and a couple of handfuls of biscuit were tossed after 
it ; when again turning the key upon them and pocketing 
it, the captain returned to the quarter-deck. Twice 
every day for three days this was repeated ; but on the 
fourth morning a confused wrangling, and then a scuffling 
was heard, as the customary summons was delivered ; 
and suddenly four men burst up from the forecastle, 
saying they were ready to turn to. The fetid closeness 
of the ah*, and a famishing diet, united perhaps to some 
fears of ultimate retribution, had constrained them to 
surrender at discretion. Emboldened by this, the captain 
reiterated his demand to the rest, but Steelkilt shouted 
up to him a terrific hint to stop his babbling and betake 
himself where he belonged. On the fifth morning three 
others of the mutineers bolted up into the air from the 
desperate arms below that sought to restrain them. 
Only three were left. 

' " Better turn to, now ? " said the captain, with a 
heartless jeer. 

' " Shut us up again, will ye ! " cried Steelkilt. 



THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 321 

4 " Oh ! certainly," said the captain, and the key clicked. 

' It was at this point, gentlemen, that enraged by the 
defection of seven of his former associates, and stung by the 
mocking voice that had last hailed him, and maddened 
by his long entombment in a place as black as the bowels 
of despair ; it was then that Steelkilt proposed to the two 
Canallers, thus far apparently of one mind with him, to 
burst out of their hole at the next summoning of the 
garrison ; and armed with their keen mincing-knives 
(long, crescentic, heavy implements with a handle at each 
end) run amuck from the bowsprit to the taffrail ; and if 
by any devilishness of desperation possible, seize the ship. 
For himself, he would do this, he said, whether they joined 
him or not. That was the last night he should spend in 
that den. But the scheme met with no opposition on 
the part of the other two ; they swore they were ready for 
that, or for any other mad thing, for anything in short 
but a surrender. And what was more, they each insisted 
upon being the first man on deck, when the time to make 
the rush should come. But to this their leader as fiercely 
objected, reserving that priority for himself ; particularly 
as his two comrades would not yield, the one to the other, 
in the matter ; and both of them could not be first, for 
the ladder would but admit one man at a time. And 
here, gentlemen, the foul play of these miscreants must 
come out. 

' Upon hearing the frantic project of their leader, each 
in his own separate soul had suddenly lighted, it would 
seem, upon the same piece of treachery, namely : to be 
foremost in breaking out, in order to be the first of the 
three, though the last of the ten, to surrender ; and there- 
by secure whatever small chance of pardon such conduct 
might merit. But when Steelkilt made known his deter- 
mination still to lead them to the last, they in some way, by 
some subtle chemistry of villainy, mixed their before secret 

VOL. i, x 



322 MOBY-DICK 

treacheries together ; and when their leader fell into a 
doze, verbally opened their souls to each other in three 
sentences ; and bound the sleeper with cords, and gagged 
him with cords ; and shrieked out for the captain at 
midnight. 

' Thinking murder at hand, and smelling in the dark 
for the blood, he and all his armed mates and harpooneers 
rushed for the forecastle. In a few minutes the scuttle 
was opened, and, bound hand and foot, the still struggling 
ringleader was shoved up into the air by his perfidious 
allies, who at once claimed the honour of securing a man 
who had been fully ripe for murder. But all these were 
collared, and dragged along the deck like dead cattle ; and, 
side by side, were seized up into the mizen rigging, like 
three quarters of meat, and there they hung till morning. 
" Damn ye," cried the captain, pacing to and fro before 
them, " the vultures would not touch ye, ye villains ! " 

' At sunrise he summoned all hands ; and separating 
those who had rebelled from those who had taken no 
part in the mutiny, he told the former that he had a good 
mind to flog them all round thought, upon the whole, 
he would do so he ought to justice demanded it ; but 
for the present, considering their timely surrender, he 
would let them go with a reprimand, which he accordingly 
administered in the vernacular. 

' " But as for you, ye carrion rogues," turning to the 
three men in the rigging " for you, I mean to mince ye 
up for the try -pots " ; and, seizing a rope, he applied it 
with all his might to the backs of the two traitors, till 
they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung their heads side- 
ways, as the two crucified thieves are drawn. 

4 " My wrist is sprained with ye ! " he cried, at last ; 
" but there is still rope enough left for you, my fine 
bantam, that wouldn't give up. Take that gag from his 
mouth, and let us hear what he can say for himself." 



THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 323 

' For a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremu- 
lous motion of his cramped jaws, and then painfully 
twisting round his head, said in a sort of hiss, " What I 
say is this and mind it well if you flog me, I murder 
you ! " 

' " Say ye so ? then see how ye frighten me " and 
the captain drew off with the rope to strike. 

' " Best not," hissed the Lakeman. 

' " But I must," and the rope was once more drawn 
back for the stroke. 

* Steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all 
but the captain ; who, to the amazement of all hands, 
started back, paced the deck rapidly two or three times, 
and then suddenly throwing down his rope, said, " I won't 
do it let him go cut him down : d' ye hear ? " 

' But as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the 
order, a pale man, with a bandaged head, arrested them 
Radney the chief mate. Ever since the blow, he had 
lain in his berth ; but that morning, hearing the tumult 
on the deck, he had crept out, and thus far had watched 
the whole scene. Such was the state of his mouth, that 
he could hardly speak ; but mumbling something about 
his being willing and able to do what the captain dared not 
attempt, he snatched the rope and advanced to his pinioned 
foe. 

* " You are a coward ! " hissed the Lakeman. 

' " So I am, but take that." The mate was in the very 
act of striking, when another hiss stayed his uplifted arm. 
He paused : and then pausing no more, made good his 
word, spite of Steelkilt 's threat, whatever that might have 
been. The three men were then cut down, all hands were 
turned to, and, sullenly worked by the moody seamen, the 
iron pumps clanged as before. 

' Just after dark that day, when one watch had retired 
below, a clamour was heard in the forecastle : and the 



324 MOBY-DICK 

two trembling traitors running up, besieged the cabin 
door, saying they durst not consort with the crew. En- 
treaties, cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so 
at their own instance they were put down in the ship's run 
for salvation. Still, no sign of mutiny reappeared among 
the rest. On the contrary, it seemed, that mainly at 
Steelkilt's instigation, they had resolved to maintain 
the strictest peacefulness, obey all orders to the last, and, 
when the ship reached port, desert her in a body. But in 
order to ensure the speediest end to the voyage, they all 
agreed to another thing namely, not to sing out for 
whales, in case any should be discovered. For, spite of 
her leak, and spite of all her other perils, the Town-Ho 
still maintained her mast-heads, and her captain was just 
as willing to lower for a fish that moment, as on the day 
his craft first struck the cruising -ground ; and Radney 
the mate was quite as ready to change his berth for a boat, 
and with his bandaged mouth seek to gag in death the 
vital jaw of the whale. 

' But though the Lakeman had induced the seamen to 
adopt this sort of passiveness in their conduct, he kept 
his own counsel (at least till all was over) concerning his 
own proper and private revenge upon the man who had 
stung him in the ventricles of his heart. He was in 
Radney the chief mate's watch ; and as if the infatuated 
man sought to run more than half-way to meet his doom, 
after the scene at the rigging, he insisted, against the 
express counsel of the captain, upon resuming the head 
of his watch at night. Upon this, and one or two other 
circumstances, Steelkilt systematically built the plan of his 
revenge. 

' During the night, Radney had an unseamanlike way 
of sitting on the bulwarks of the quarter-deck, and leaning 
his arm upon the gunwale of the boat which was hoisted 
up there, a little above the ship's side. In this attitude, 



THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 325 

it was well known, he sometimes dozed. There was a 
considerable vacancy between the boat and the ship, and 
down between this was the sea. Steelkilt calculated his 
time, and found that his next trick at the helm would 
come round at two o'clock, in the morning of the third 
day from that in which he had been betrayed. At his 
leisure, he employed the interval in braiding something 
very carefully in his watches below. 

' " What are you making there ? " said a shipmate. 

c " What do you think ? what does it look like ? " 

' " Like a lanyard for your bag ; but it 's an odd one, 
seems to me." 

' " Yes, rather oddish," said the Lakeman, holding it 
at arm's length before him ; " but I think it will answer. 
Shipmate, I haven't enough twine, have you any ? " 

' But there was none in the forecastle. 

' " Then I must get some from old Had " ; and he rose 
to go aft. 

' " You don't mean to go a-begging to him I " said a 
sailor. 

' " Why not ? Do you think he won't do me a turn, 
when it 's to help himself in the end, shipmate ? " and 
going to the mate, he looked at him quietly, and asked 
him for some twine to mend his hammock. It was given 
him neither twine nor lanyard were seen again ; but 
the next night an iron ball, closely netted, partly rolled 
from the pocket of the Lakeman's monkey-jacket, as he 
was tucking the coat into his hammock for a pillow. 
Twenty-four hours after, his trick at the silent helm 
nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the grave always 
ready dug to the seaman's hand that fatal hour was then 
to come ; and in the fore -ordaining soul of Steelkilt, the 
mate was already stark and stretched as a corpse, with his 
forehead crushed in. 

4 But, gentlemen, a fool saved the would-be murderer 



326 MOBY-DICK 

from the bloody deed he had planned. Yet complete 
revenge he had, and without being the avenger. For by 
a mysterious fatality, Heaven itself seemed to step in to 
take out of his hands into its own the damning thing he 
would have done. 

1 It was just between daybreak and sunrise of the 
morning of the second day, when they were washing down 
the decks, that a stupid Teneriffe man, drawing water in 
the main-chains, all at once shouted out, " There she rolls ! 
there she rolls ! " Jesu, what a whale ! It was Mahv^JQick. 

4 " Moby-Dick ! " cried Don Sebastian ; " St. Dominic ! 
sir sailor, but do whales have christenings ? Whom call 
you Moby-Dick ? " 

4 " A very white, and famous, and most deadly immortal 
monster, Don ; but that would be too long a story." 

4 " How ? how ? " cried all the young Spaniards, 
crowding. 

' " Nay, Dons, Dons nay, nay ! I cannot rehearse 
that now. Let me get more into the air, sirs." 

4 " Chicha ! the chicha ! " cried Don Pedro ; " our 
vigorous friend looks faint ; fill up his empty glass ! " 

4 No need, gentlemen ; one moment, and I proceed. 
Now, gentlemen, so suddenly perceiving the snowy whale 
within fifty yards of the ship forgetful of the compact 
among the crew in the excitement of the moment, the 
Teneriffe man had instinctively and involuntarily lifted 
his voice for the monster, though for some little time past 
it had been plainly beheld from the three sullen mast-heads. 
All was now a frenzy. " The White Whale the White 
Whale ! " was the cry from captain, mates, and har- 
pooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumours, were all 
anxious to capture so famous and precious a fish ; while 
the dogged crew eyed askance, and with curses, the appal- 
ling beauty of the vast milky mass, that lit up by a hori- 
zontal spangling sun, shifted and glistened like a living 



THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 327 

opal in the blue morning sea. Gentlemen, a strange 
fatality pervades the whole career of these events, as if 
verily mapped out before the world itself was charted. 
The mutineer was the bowsman of the mate, and when 
fast to a fish, it was his duty to sit next him, while Radney 
stood up with his lance in the prow, and haul in or slacken 
the line, at the word of command. Moreover, when the 
four boats were lowered, the mate's got the start ; and 
none howled more fiercely with delight than did Steelkilt, 
as he strained at his oar. After a stiff pull, their har- 
pooneer got fast, and, spear in hand, Radney sprang to 
the bow. He was always a furious man, it seems, in a 
boat. And now his bandaged cry was, to beach him 
on the whale's topmost back. Nothing loath, his bows- 
man hauled him up and up, through a blinding foam that 
blent two whitenesses together ; till of a sudden the boat 
struck as against a sunken ledge, and keeling over, spilled 
out the standing mate. That instant, as he fell on the 
whale's slippery back, the boat righted, and was dashed 
aside by the swell, while Radney was tossed over into the 
sea, on the other flank of the whale . He struck out through 
the spray, and, for an instant, was dimly seen through 
that veil, wildly seeking to remove himself from the eye 
of Moby-Dick. But the whale rushed round in a sudden 
maelstrom ; seized the swimmer between his jaws ; and 
rearing high up with him, plunged headlong again, and 
went down. 

' Meantime, at the first tap of the boat's bottom, the 
Lakeman had slackened the line, so as to drop astern from 
the whirlpool ; calmly looking on, he thought his own 
thoughts. But a sudden, terrific, downward jerking 
of the boat, quickly brought his knife to the line. He 
cut it ; and the whale was free. But, at some distance, 
Moby-Dick rose again, with some tatters of Radney 's 
red woollen shirt caught in the teeth that had destroyed 



328 MOBY-DICK 

him. All four boats gave chase again ; but the whale 
eluded them, and finally wholly disappeared. 

' In good time, the Town-Ho reached her port a savage, 
solitary place where no civilised creature resided. 
There, headed by the Lake man, all but five or six of the 
foremast-men deliberately deserted among the palms ; 
eventually, as it turned out, seizing a large double war- 
canoe of the savages, and setting sail for some other 
harbour. 

4 The ship's company being reduced to but a handful, 
the captain called upon the Islanders to assist him in the 
laborious business of heaving down the ship to stop the 
leak. But to such unresting vigilance over their danger- 
ous allies was this small band of whites necessitated, both 
by night and by day, and so extreme was the hard work 
they underwent, that upon the vessel being ready again 
for sea, they were in such a weakened condition that the 
captain durst not put off with them in so heavy a vessel. 
After taking counsel with his officers, he anchored the 
ship as far off shore as possible ; loaded and ran out his 
two cannon from the bows ; stacked his muskets on the 
poop ; and warning the Islanders not to approach the 
ship at their peril, took one man with him, and setting 
the sail of his best whale-boat, steered straight before the 
wind for Tahiti, five hundred miles distant, to procure 
a reinforcement to his crew. 

' On the fourth day of the sail, a large canoe was 
descried, which seemed to have touched at a low isle of 
corals. He steered away from it ; but the savage craft 
bore down on him ; and soon the voice of Steelkilt hailed 
him to heave to, or he would run him under water. The 
captain presented a pistol. With one foot on each prow 
of the yoked war-canoes, the Lakeman laughed him to 
scorn ; assuring him that if the pistol so much as clicked 
in the lock, he would bury him in bubbles and foam. 



THE TOWN-HO'S STORY 329 

' " What do you want of me ? " cried the captain. 

' " Where are you bound ? and for what are you 
bound ? " demanded Steelkilt ; "no lies." 

' " I am bound to Tahiti for more men." 

' " Very good. Let me board you a moment I come 
in peace." With that he leaped from the canoe, swam to 
the boat ; and climbing the gunwale, stood face to face 
with the captain. 

" Cross your arms, sir ; throw back your head. Now, 
repeat after me. As soon as Steelkilt leaves me, I swear 
to beach this boat on yonder island, and remain there six 
days. If I do not, may lightnings strike me ! " 

' " A pretty scholar," laughed the Lakeman. " Adios, 
Senor ! " and leaping into the sea, he swam back to his 
comrades. 

' Watching the boat till it was fairly beached, and 
drawn up to the roots of the cocoa-nut trees, Steelkilt 
made sail again, and in due time arrived at Tahiti, his 
own place of destination. There, luck befriended him ; 
two ships were about to sail for France, and were provi- 
dentially in want of precisely that number of men which 
the sailor headed. They embarked ; and so forever got 
the start of their former captain, had he been at all minded 
to work them legal retribution. 

' Some ten days after the French ships sailed, the whale- 
boat arrived, and the captain was forced to enlist some of 
the more civilised Tahitians, who had been somewhat 
used to the sea. Chartering a small native schooner, he 
returned with them to his vessel ; and finding all right 
there, again resumed his cruisings. 

' Where Steelkilt now is, gentlemen, none know ; but 
upon the island of Nantucket, the widow of Radney still 
turns to the sea which refuses to give up its dead ; still 
in dreams sees the awful White Whale that destroyed 
him. * * * 



330 MOBY-DICK 

' " Are you through ? " said Don Sebastian quietly. 

1 " I am, Don." 

6 " Then I entreat you, tell me if to the best of your 
own convictions, this your story is in substance really 
true ? It is so passing wonderful ! Did you get it from an 
unquestionable source ? Bear with me if I seem to press." 

' " Also bear with all of us, sir sailor ; for we all join 
in Don Sebastian's suit," cried the company, with exceed- 
ing interest. 

' " Is there a copy of the Holy Evangelists hi the Golden 
Inn, gentlemen ? " 

' " Nay," said Don Sebastian ; " but I know a worthy 
priest near by, who will quickly procure one for me. I 
go for it ; but are you well advised ? this may grow too 
serious." 

' " Will you be so good as to bring the priest also, Don ? " 

' " Though there are no Auto-da-Fes in Lima now," 
said one of the company to another ; "I fear our sailor 
friend runs risk of the archiepiscopacy. Let us withdraw 
more out of the moonlight. I see no need of this." 

' " Excuse me for running after you, Don Sebastian ; 
but may I also beg that you will be particular in procuring 

the largest -sized Evangelists you can." 

******* 

' " This is the priest, he brings you the Evangelists," 
said Don Sebastian gravely, returning with a tall and 
solemn figure. 

' " Let me remove my hat. Now, venerable priest, 
further into the light, and hold the Holy Book before me 
that I may touch it. 

' " So help me Heaven, and on my honour the story I 
have told ye, gentlemen, is in substance and its great 
items, true. I know it to be true ; it happened on this 
ball ; I trod the ship ; I knew the crew ; I have seen and 
talked with Steelkilt since the death of Radney." 



CHAPTER LV 

OF THE MONSTROUS PICTURES OF WHALES 

I SHALL ere long paint to you as well as one can without 
canvas, something like the true form of the whale as he 
actually appears to the eye of the whaleman when in his 
own absolute body the whale is moored alongside the 
whale -ship so that he can be fairly stepped upon there. 
It may be worth while, therefore, previously to advert 
to those curious imaginary portraits of him which even 
down to the present day confidently challenge the faith 
of the landsman. It is time to set the world right in 
this matter, by proving such pictures of the whale all 
wrong. 

It may be that the primal source of all those pictorial 
delusions will be found among the oldest Hindu, Egyptian, 
and Grecian sculptures. For ever since those inventive 
but unscrupulous times when on the marble panellings 
of temples, the pedestals of statues, and on shields, 
medallions, cups, and coins, the dolphin was drawn in 
scales of chain-armour like Saladin's, and a helmeted 
head like St. George's ; ever since then has something 
of the same sort of licence prevailed, not only in most 
popular pictures of the whale, but in many scientific 
presentations of him. 

Now, by all odds, the most ancient extant portrait 
anyways purporting to be the whale's, is to be found in 
the famous cavern -pagoda of Elephanta, in India. The 
Brahmins maintain that in the almost endless sculptures 
of that immemorial pagoda, all the trades and pursuits, 

331 



332 MOBY-DICK 

every conceivable avocation of man, were prefigured ages 
before any of them actually came into being. No wonder, 
then, that in some sort our noble profession of whaling 
should have been there shadowed forth. The Hindu 
whale referred to, occurs in a separate department of the 
wall, depicting the incarnation of Vishnu in the form of 
leviathan, learnedly known as the Matse Avatar. But 
though this sculpture is half man and half whale, so as 
only to give the tail of the latter, yet that small section 
of him is all wrong. It looks more like the tapering tail 
of an anaconda a than the broad palms of the true whale's 
majestic flukes. 

But go to the old galleries, and look now at a great 
Christian painter's portrait of this fish ; for he succeeds 
no better than the antediluvian Hindu. It is Guide's 
picture of Perseus rescuing Andromeda from the sea- 
monster or whale. Where did Guido get the model of 
such a strange creature as that ? Nor does Hogarth, in 
painting the same scene in his own ' Perseus Descending,' 
make out one whit better. The huge corpulence of that 
Hogarthian monster undulates on the surface, scarcely 
drawing one inch of water. It has a sort of howdah on its 
back, and its distended tusked mouth into which the 
billows are rolling, might be taken for the Traitors' Gate 
leading from the Thames by water into the Tower. Then, 
there are the Prodromus whales of old Scotch Sibbald, 
and Jonah's whale, as depicted in the prints of old Bibles 
and the cuts of old primers. What shall be said of these ? 
As for the bookbinder's whale winding like a vine-stalk 
round the stock of a descending anchor as stamped and 
gilded on the backs and title-pages of many books both 
old and new that is a very picturesque but purely 
fabulous creature, imitated, I take it, from the like figures 
on antique vases. Though universally denominated a 
dolphin, I nevertheless call this bookbinder's fish an 



MONSTROUS PICTURES OF WHALES 333 

attempt at a whale ; because it was so intended when the 
device was first introduced. It was introduced by an old 
Italian publisher somewhere about the 15th century, 
during the Revival of Learning ; and in those days, and 
even down to a comparatively late period, dolphins were 
popularly supposed to be a species of the leviathan. 

In the vignettes and other embellishments of some 
ancient books you will at times meet with very curious 
touches at the whale, where all manner of spouts, jets 
d'eau, hot springs and cold, Saratoga and Baden-Baden, 
come bubbling up from his unexhausted brain. In the 
title-page of the original edition of the Advancement of 
Learning you will find some curious whales. 

But quitting all these unprofessional attempts, let us 
glance at those pictures of leviathan purporting to be 
sober, scientific delineations, by those who know. In 
old Harris's collection of voyages there are some plates 
of whales extracted from a Dutch book of voyages, A.D. 
1671, entitled A Whaling Voyage to Spitzbergen in the ship 
Jonas in the Whale, Peter Peterson of Friesland, master. 
In one of those plates the whales, like great rafts of 
logs, are represented lying among ice-isles, with white 
bears running over their living backs. In another 
plate, the prodigious blunder is made of representing 
the whale with perpendicular flukes. 

Then again, there is an imposing quarto, written by one 
Captain Colnett, a post-captain in the English navy, 
entitled A Voyage round Cape Horn into the South Seas, 
for the purpose of extending the Spermaceti Whale Fisheries. 
In this book is an outline purporting to be a ' Picture of a 
Physeter or Spermaceti whale, drawn by scale from one 
killed on the coast of Mexico, August 1793, and hoisted 
on deck.' I doubt not the captain had this veracious 
picture taken for the benefit of his marines. To mention 
but one thing about it, let me say that it has an eye which 



334 MOBY-DICK 

applied, according to the accompanying scale, to a full- 
grown sperm whale, would make the eye of that whale a 
bow- window some five feet long. Ah, my gallant cap- 
tain, why did ye not give us Jonah looking out of that eye ! 

Nor are the most conscientious compilations of Natural 
History for the benefit of the young and tender, free from 
the same heinousness of mistake. Look at that popular 
work Goldsmith's Animated Nature. In the abridged 
London edition of 1807, there are plates of an alleged 
'whale' and a 'narwhale.' I do not wish to seem 
inelegant, but this unsightly whale looks much like an 
amputated sow ; and, as for the nar whale, one glimpse at 
it is enough to amaze one, that in this nineteenth century 
such a hippogrrff could be palmed for genuine upon any 
intelligent public of schoolboys. 

Then, again, in 1825, Bernard Germain, Count de Lace- 
pede, a great naturalist, published a scientific systematised 
whale book, wherein are several pictures of the different 
species of the leviathan. All these are not only incorrect, 
but the picture of the Mysticetus or Greenland whale 
(that is to say, the right whale), even Scoresby, a long- 
experienced man as touching that species, declares not 
to have its counterpart in nature. 

But the placing of the cap -sheaf to all this blundering 
business was reserved for the scientific Frederick Cuvier, 
brother to the famous Baron. In 1836, he published a 
Natural History of Whales, in which he gives what he 
calls a picture of the sperm whale. Before showing that 
picture to any Nantucketer, you had best provide for 
your summary retreat from Nantucket. In a word, 
Frederick Cuvier's sperm whale is not a sperm whale, 
but a squash. Of course, he never had the benefit of a 
whaling voyage (such men seldom have), but whence he 
derived that picture, who can tell ? Perhaps he got it 
as his scientific predecessor in the same field, Desmarest, 



MONSTROUS PICTURES OF WHALES 335 

got one of his authentic abortions ; that is, from a Chinese 
drawing. And what sort of lively lads with the pencil 
those Chinese are, many queer cups and saucers inform us. 

As for the sign-painters' whales seen in the streets 
hanging over the shops of oil-dealers, what shall be said 
of them ? They are generally Richard in. whales, with 
dromedary humps, and very savage ; breakfasting on 
three or four sailor tarts, that is whale-boats full of 
mariners : their deformities floundering in seas of blood 
and blue paint. 

But these manifold mistakes in depicting the whale are 
not so very surprising after all. Consider ! Most of the 
scientific drawings have been taken from the stranded 
fish ; and these are about as correct as a drawing of a 
wrecked ship, with broken back, would correctly repre- 
sent the noble animal itself in all its undashed pride of 
hull and spars. Though elephants have stood for their 
full-lengths, the living leviathan has never yet fairly 
floated himself for his portrait. The living whale, in his 
full majesty and significance, is only to be seen at sea in 
unfathomable waters ; and afloat the vast bulk of him 
is out of sight, like a launched line-of-battle ship ; and 
out of that element it is a thing eternally impossible for 
mortal man to hoist him bodily into the air, so as to 
preserve all his mighty swells and undulations. And, 
not to speak of the highly presumable difference of con- 
tour between a young sucking whale and a full-grown 
Platonian leviathan ; yet, even in the case of one of those 
young sucking whales hoisted to a ship's deck, such is 
then the outlandish, eel-like, limbered, varying shape of 
him, that his precise expression the devil himself could 
not catch. 

But it may be fancied, that from the naked skeleton 
of the stranded whale, accurate hints may be derived 
touching his true form. Not at all. For it is one of the 



336 MOBY-DICK 

more curious things about this leviathan, that his skele- 
ton gives very little idea of his general shape. Though 
Jeremy Bentham's skeleton, which hangs for candelabra 
in the library of one of his executors, correctly conveys 
the idea of a burly -browed utilitarian old gentleman, with 
all Jeremy's other leading personal characteristics ; yet 
nothing of this kind could be inferred from any leviathan's 
articulated bones. In fact, as the great Hunter says, the 
mere skeleton of the whale bears the same relation to the 
fully invested and padded animal as the insect does to 
the chrysalis that so roundingly envelops it. This peculi- 
arity is strikingly evinced in the head, as in some part of 
this book will be incidentally shown. It is also very 
curiously displayed in the side fin, the bones of which 
almost exactly answer to the bones of the human hand, 
minus only the thumb. This fin has four regular bone- 
fingers, the index, middle, ring, and little finger. But all 
these are permanently lodged in their fleshy covering, 
as the human fingers in an artificial covering. ' However 
recklessly the whale may sometimes serve us/ said 
humorous Stubb one day, ' he can never be truly said to 
handle us without mittens.' 

For all these reasons, then, any way you may look at it, 
you must needs conclude that the great leviathan is that 
one creature in the world which must remain unpainted 
to the last. True, one portrait may hit the mark much 
nearer than another, but none can hit it with any very 
considerable degree of exactness. So there is no earthly 
way of finding out precisely what the whale really looks 
like. And the only mode in which you can derive even 
a tolerable idea of his living contour, is by going a-whaling 
yourself ; but by so doing, you run no small risk of being 
eternally stove and sunk by him. Wherefore, it seems to 
me you had best not be too fastidious in your curiosity 
touching this leviathan. 



CHAPTER LVI 

OF THE LESS ERRONEOUS PICTURES OF WHALES, AND THE 
TRUE PICTURES OF WHALING SCENES 

IN connection with the monstrous pictures of whales, I 
am strongly tempted here to enter upon those still more 
monstrous stories of them which are to be found in certain 
books, both ancient and modern, especially hi Pliny, 
Purchas, Hakluyt, Harris, Cuvier, etc. But I pass that 
matter by. 

I know of only four published outlines of the great 
sperm whale : Colnett's, Huggins's, Frederick Cuvier 's, 
and Beale's. In the previous chapter Colnett and Cuvier 
have been referred to. Huggins's is far better than theirs ; 
but, by great odds, Beale's is the best. All Beale's draw- 
ings of this whale are good, excepting the middle figure 
in the picture of three whales in various attitudes, capping 
his second chapter. His frontispiece, boats attacking 
sperm whales, though no doubt calculated to excite the 
civil scepticism of some parlour men, is admirably correct 
and lifelike in its general effect. Some of the sperm 
whale drawings in J. Ross Browne are pretty correct in 
contour ; but they are wretchedly engraved. That is 
not his fault, though. 

Of the right whale, the best outline pictures are in 
Scoresby ; but they are drawn on too small a scale to 
convey a desirable impression. He has but one picture 
of whaling scenes, and this is a sad deficiency, because it 
is by such pictures only, when at all well done, that you 

VOL. I. Y 



338 MOBY-DICK 

can derive anything like a truthful idea of the living whale 
as seen by his living hunters. 

But, taken for all in all, by far the finest, though in some 
details not the most correct, presentations of whales and 
whaling scenes to be anywhere found, are two large 
French engravings, well executed, and taken from paint- 
ings by one Garnery. Respectively, they represent 
attacks on the sperm and right whale. In the first en- 
graving a noble sperm whale is depicted in full majesty 
of might, just risen beneath the boat from the profundities 
of the ocean, and bearing high in the air upon his back the 
terrific wreck of the stoven planks. The prow of the boat 
is partially unbroken, and is drawn just balancing upon 
the monster's spine ; and standing in that prow, for that 
one single incomputable flash of time, you behold an oars- 
man, half shrouded by the incensed boiling spout of the 
whale, and in the act of leaping, as if from a precipice. 
The action of the whole thing is wonderfully good and true. 
The half -emptied line-tub floats on the whitened sea ; the 
wooden poles of the spilled harpoons obliquely bob in it ; 
the heads of the swimming crew are scattered about the 
whale in contrasting expressions of affright ; while hi the 
black stormy distance the ship is bearing down upon the 
scene. Serious fault might be found with the anatomical 
details of this whale, but let that pass ; since, for the life 
of me, I could not draw so good a one. 

In the second engraving, the boat is in the act of draw- 
ing alongside the barnacled flank of a large running right 
whale, that rolls his black weedy bulk in the sea like some 
mossy rock-slide from the Patagonian cliffs. His jets 
are erect, full, and black like soot ; so that from so 
abounding a smoke in the chimney, you would think there 
must be a brave supper cooking in the great bowels below. 
Sea-fowls are pecking at the small crabs, shell-fish, and 
other sea-candies and macaroni, which the right whale 



LESS ERRONEOUS PICTURES 339 

sometimes carries on his pestilent back. And all the 
while the thick-lipped leviathan is rushing through the 
deep, leaving tons of tumultuous white curds in his wake, 
and causing the slight boat to rock in the swells like a 
skiff caught nigh the paddle-wheels of an ocean steamer. 
Thus, the foreground is all raging commotion ; but 
behind, in admirable artistic contrast, is the glassy 
level of a sea becalmed, the drooping unstarched sails 
of the powerless ship, and the inert mass of a dead 
whale, a conquered fortress, with the flag of capture 
lazily hanging from the whale-pole inserted into his 
spout -hole. 

Who Garnery the painter is, or was, I know not. But 
my life for it he was either practically conversant with his 
subject, or else marvellously tutored by some experienced 
whaleman. The French are the lads for painting action. 
Go and gaze upon all the paintings of Europe, and where 
will you find such a gallery of living and breathing com- 
motion on canvas, as in that triumphal hall at Versailles ; 
where the beholder fights his way, pell-mell, through the 
consecutive great battles of France ; where every sword 
seems a flash of the Northern Lights, and the successive 
armed kings and emperors dash by, like a charge of 
crowned centaurs ? Not wholly unworthy of a place in 
that gallery, are those sea-battle pieces of Garnery. 

The natural aptitude of the French for seizing the 
picturesqueness of things seems to be peculiarly evinced 
in what paintings and engravings they have of their 
whaling scenes. With not one tenth of England's experi- 
ence in the fishery, and not the thousandth part of that 
of the Americans, they have nevertheless furnished both 
nations with the only finished sketches at all capable 
of conveying the real spirit of the whale-hunt. For the 
most part, the English and American whale draughtsmen 
seem entirely content with presenting the mechanical 



340 MOBY-DICK 

outline of things, such as the vacant profile of the whale ; 
which, so far as picturesqueness of effect is concerned, is 
about tantamount to sketching the profile of a pyramid. 
Even Scoresby, the justly renowned right whaleman, 
after giving us a stiff full-length of the Greenland whale, 
and three or four delicate miniatures of narwhales and 
porpoises, treats us to a series of classical engravings of 
boat-hooks, chopping-knives, and grapnels ; and with the 
microscopic diligence of a Leuwenhoeck submits to the 
inspection of a shivering world ninety-six facsimiles of 
magnified Arctic snow crystals. I mean no disparagement 
to the excellent voyager (I honour him for a veteran), but 
in so important a matter it was certainly an oversight not 
to have procured for every crystal a sworn affidavit taken 
before a Greenland Justice of the Peace. 

In addition to those fine engravings from Garnery, there 
are two other French engravings worthy of note, by some- 
one who subscribes himself ' H. Durand.' One of them, 
though not precisely adapted to our present purpose, 
nevertheless deserves mention on other accounts. It is a 
quiet noon-scene among the isles of the Pacific ; a French 
whaler anchored, inshore, in a calm, and lazily taking 
water on board ; the loosened sails of the ship, and the 
long leaves of the palms in the background, both drooping 
together in the breezeless air. The effect is very fine, 
when considered with reference to its presenting the hardy 
fishermen under one of their few aspects of oriental 
repose. The other engraving is quite a different affair : 
the ship hove-to upon the open sea, and in the very heart 
of the leviathanic life, with a right whale alongside ; the 
vessel (in the act of cutting -in) hove over to the monster 
as if to a quay ; and a boat, hurriedly pushing off from 
this scene of activity, is about giving chase to whales in 
the distance. The harpoons and lances lie levelled for 
use ; three oarsmen are just setting the mast in its hole ; 



LESS ERRONEOUS PICTURES 341 

while from a sudden roll of the sea, the little craft stands 
half -erect out of the water, like a rearing horse. From 
the ship, the smoke of the torments of the boiling whale 
is going up like the smoke over a village of smithies ; and 
to windward, a black cloud, rising up with earnest of 
squalls and rains, seems to quicken the activity of the 
excited seamen. 






CHAPTER LVII 

OF WHALES IN PAINT ; IN TEETH ; IN WOOD ; IN SHEET- 
IRON ; IN STONE ; IN MOUNTAINS ; IN STARS 

ON Tower Hill, as you go down to the London docks, you 
may have seen a crippled beggar (or kedger, as the sailors 
say) holding a painted board before him, representing 
the tragic scene in which he lost his leg. There are three 
whales and three boats ; and one of the boats (presumed 
to contain the missing leg in all its original integrity) is 
being crunched by the jaws of the foremost whale. Any 
time these ten years, they tell me, has that man held up 
that picture, and exhibited that stump to an incredulous 
world. But the time of his justification has now come. 
His three whales are as good whales as were ever published 
in Wapping, at any rate ; and his stump as unquestion- 
able a stump as any you will find in the Western clearings. 
But, though forever mounted on that stump, never a 
stump-speech does the poor whaleman make ; but, with 
downcast eyes, stands ruefully contemplating his own 
amputation. 

Throughout the Pacific, and also in Nantucket, and 
New Bedford, and Sag Harbour, you will come across 
lively sketches of whales and whaling scenes, graven by 
the fishermen themselves on sperm whale-teeth, or ladies' 
busks wrought out of the right whalebone, and other like 
skrimshander articles, as the whalemen call the numerous 
little ingenious contrivances they elaborately carve out 
of the rough material, in their hours of ocean leisure. 
Some of them have little boxes of dentistical-looking 

342 



WHALES VARIOUSLY REPRESENTED 343 

implements, specially intended for the skrimshandering 
business. But, in general, they toil with their jack- 
knives alone ; and, with that almost omnipotent tool of 
the sailor, they will turn you out anything you please, 
in the way of a mariner's fancy. 

Long exile from Christendom and civilisation inevitably 
restores a man to that condition in which God placed him, 
i.e. what is called savagery. Your true whale-hunter is as 
much a savage as an Iroquois. I myself am a savage, 
owning no allegiance but to the King of the Cannibals ; 
and ready at any moment to rebel against him. 

Now, one of the peculiar characteristics of the savage 
in his domestic hours, is his wonderful patience of industry. 
An ancient Hawaiian war-club or spear-paddle, in its full 
multiplicity and elaboration of carving, is as great a 
trophy of human perseverance as a Latin lexicon. For, 
with but a bit of broken sea-shell or a shark's tooth, that 
miraculous intricacy of wooden net work has been achieved ; 
and it has cost steady years of steady application. 

As with the Hawaiian savage, so with the white sailor- 
savage. With the same marvellous patience, and with 
the same single shark's tooth, of his one poor jack-knife, 
he will carve you a bit of bone sculpture, not quite as 
workmanlike, but as close packed in its maziness of 
design, as the Greek savage, Achilles's shield ; and full 
of barbaric spirit and suggestiveness, as the prints of that 
fine old Dutch savage, Albert Durer. 

Wooden whales, or whales cut in profile out of the 
small dark slabs of the noble South Sea war-wood, are 
frequently met with in the forecastles of American whalers. 
Some of them are done with much accuracy. 

At some old gable-roofed country houses you will see 
brass whales hung by the tail for knockers to the roadside 
door. When the porter is sleepy, the anvil-headed whale 
would be best. But these knocking whales are seldom 



344 MOBY-DICK 

remarkable as faithful essays. On the spires of some old- 
fashioned churches you will see sheet-iron whales placed 
there for weather-cocks ; but they are so elevated, and 
besides that are to all intents and purposes so labelled 
with ' Hands off ! ' you cannot examine them closely 
enough to decide upon their merit. 

In bony, ribby regions of the earth, where at the base 
of high broken cliffs masses of rock lie strewn in fantastic 
groupings upon the plain, you will often discover images 
as of the petrified forms of the leviathan partly merged 
in grass, which of a windy day breaks against them in a 
surf of green surges. 

Then, again, in mountainous countries where the 
traveller is continually girdled by amphitheatrical 
heights ; here and there from some lucky point of view 
you will catch passing glimpses of the profiles of whales 
defined along the undulating ridges. But you must be a 
thorough whaleman, to see these sights ; and not only 
that, but if you wish to return to such a sight again, you 
must be sure and take the exact intersecting latitude and 
longitude of your first standpoint, else so chance-like are 
such observations of the hills, that your precise, previous 
standpoint would require a laborious rediscovery ; like 
the Soloma islands, which still remain incognita, though 
once high-ruffed Mendanna trod them and old Figuera 
chronicled them. 

Nor when expandingly lifted by your subject, can you 
fail to trace out great whales in the starry heavens, and 
boats in pursuit of them ; as when long filled with 
thoughts of war the Eastern nations saw armies locked 
in battle among the clouds. Thus at the North have I 
chased leviathan round and round the Pole with the 
revolutions of the bright points that first defined him to 
me. And beneath the effulgent Antarctic skies I have 
boarded the Argo-Navis, and joined the chase against 



WHALES VARIOUSLY REPRESENTED 345 

the starry Cetus far beyond the utmost stretch of Hydras 
and the Flying Fish. 

With a frigate's anchors for my bridle -bits and fasces 
of harpoons for spurs, would I could mount that whale 
and leap the topmost skies, to see whether the fabled 
heavens with all their countless tents really lie encamped 
beyond my mortal sight ! 



CHAPTER LVII1 

BRIT 

STEERING north-eastward from the Crozetts, we fell in with 
vast meadows of brit, the minute, yellow substance upon 
which the right whale largely feeds. For leagues and 
leagues it undulated round us, so that we seemed to be 
sailing through boundless fields of ripe and golden wheat. 

On the second day, numbers of right whales were seen, 
who, secure from the attack of a sperm whaler like the 
Pequod, with open jaws sluggishly swam through the brit, 
which, adhering to the fringing fibres of that wondrous 
Venetian blind in their mouths, was in that manner 
separated from the water that escaped at the lip. 

As morning mowers, who side by side slowly arid 
seethingly advance their scythes through the long wet 
grass of marshy meads ; even so these monsters swam, 
making a strange, grassy, cutting sound ; and leaving 
behind them endless swaths of blue upon the yellow 
sea. 1 

But it was only the sound they made as they parted 
the brit which at all reminded one of mowers. Seen from 
the mast-heads, especially when they paused and were 
stationary for a while, their vast black forms looked more 
like lifeless masses of rock than anything else. And as 
in the great hunting countries of India, the stranger at a 

1 That part of the sea known among whalemen as the ' Brazil Banks ' 
does not bear that name as the Banks of Newfoundland do, because of 
there being shallows and soundings there, but because of this remarkable 
meadow-like appearance, caused by the vast drifts of brit continually 
floating in those latitudes, where the right whale is often chased. 
346 



BRIT 347 

distance will sometimes pass on the plains recumbent 
elephants without knowing them to be such, taking them 
for bare, blackened elevations of the soil ; even so, often, 
with him who for the first time beholds this species of 
the leviathans of the sea. And even when recognised at 
last, their immense magnitude renders it very hard really 
to believe that such bulky masses of overgrowth can 
possibly be instinct, in all parts, with the same sort of life 
that lives in a dog or a horse. 

Indeed, in other respects, you can hardly regard any 
creatures of the deep with the same feelings that you do 
those of the shore. For though some old naturalists have 
maintained that all creatures of the land are of their kind 
in the sea ; and though taking a broad general view of 
the thing, this may very well be ; yet coming to specialities, 
where, for example, does the ocean furnish any fish that 
in disposition answers to the sagacious kindness of the 
dog ? The accursed shark alone can in any generic 
respect be said to bear comparative analogy to him. 

But though, to landsmen in general, the native in- 
habitants of the seas have ever been regarded with 
emotions unspeakably unsocial and repelling ; though we 
know the sea to be an everlasting terra incognita, so that 
Columbus sailed over numberless unknown worlds to 
discover his one superficial western one ; though, by vast 
odds, the most terrific of all mortal disasters have im- 
memorially and indiscriminately befallen tens and 
hundreds of thousands of those who have gone upon the 
waters ; though but a moment's consideration will teach, 
that however baby man may brag of his science and skill, 
and however much, in a flattering future, that science and 
skill may augment ; yet forever and forever, to the crack 
of doom, the sea will insult and murder him, and pulverise 
the stateliest, stiffest frigate he can make ; nevertheless, 
by the continual repetition of these very impressions, 



348 MOBY-DICK 

man has lost that sense of the full awfulness of the sea 
which aboriginally belongs to it. 

The jirst boat we read of, floated on an ocean, that with 
Portuguese vengeance had whelmed a whole world with- 
out leaving so much as a widow. That same ocean rolls 
now ; that same ocean destroyed the wrecked ships of 
last year. Yea, foolish mortals, Noah's flood is not yet 
subsided ; two -thirds of the fair world it yet covers. 

Wherein differ the sea and the land, that a miracle 
upon one is not a miracle upon the other ? Preternatural 
terrors rested upon the Hebrews, when under the feet of 
Korah and his company the live ground opened and 
swallowed them up forever ; yet not a modern sun ever 
sets, but in precisely the same manner the live sea swallows 
up ships and crews. 

But not only is the sea such a foe to man who is an alien 
to it, but it is also a fiend to its own offspring ; worse than 
the Persian host who murdered his own guests ; sparing 
not the creatures which itself hath spawned. Like a 
savage tigress that tossing in the jungle overlays her 
own cubs, so the sea dashes even the mightiest whales 
against the rocks, and leaves them there side by side with 
the split wrecks of ships. No mercy, no power but its 
own controls it. Panting and snorting like a mad battle- 
steed that has lost its rider, the masterless ocean overruns 
the globe. 

Consider the subtleness of the sea ; how its most 
dreaded creatures glide under water, unapparent for the 
most part, and treacherously hidden beneath the loveliest 
tints of azure. Consider also the devilish brilliance and 
beauty of many of its most remorseless tribes, as the 
dainty embellished shape of many species of sharks. 
Consider, once more, the universal cannibalism of the 
sea ; all whose creatures prey upon each other, carrying 
on eternal war since the world began. 



BRIT 349 

Consider all this ; and then turn to this green, gentle, 
and most docile earth ; consider them both, the sea 
and the land ; and do you not find a strange analogy to 
something in yourself ? For as this appalling ocean 
surrounds the verdant land, so in the soul of man there 
lies one insular Tahiti, full of peace and joy, but encom- 
passed by all the horrors of the half -known life. God 
keep thee ! Push not off from that isle, thou canst never 
return ! 






CHAPTER LIX 

SQUID 

SLOWLY wading through the meadows of brit, the Pequod 
still held on her way north-eastward toward the island 
of Java ; a gentle air impelling her keel, so that in the 
surrounding serenity her three tall tapering masts mildly 
waved to that languid breeze, as three mild palms on a 
plain. And still, at wide intervals in the silvery night, 
the lonely, alluring jet would be seen. 

But one transparent blue morning, when a stillness 
almost preternatural spread over the sea, however un- 
attended with any stagnant calm ; when the long bur- 
nished sun-glade on the waters seemed a golden finger 
laid across them, enjoining some secrecy ; when the 
slippered waves whispered together as they softly ran on ; 
in this profound hush of the visible sphere a strange spectre 
was seen by Daggoo from the mainmast-head. 

In the distance, a great white mass lazily rose, and rising 
higher and higher, and disentangling itself from the azure, 
at last gleamed before our prow like a snow-slide, new slid 
from the hills. Thus glistening for a moment, as slowly 
it subsided, and sank. Then once more arose, and silently 
gleamed. It seemed not a whale ; and yet is this Moby- 
Dick ? thought Daggoo. Again the phantom went down, 
but on reappearing once more, with a stiletto-like cry that 
startled every man from his nod, the negro yelled out 
4 There ! there again ! there she breaches ! right ahead ! 
The White Whale, the White Whale ! ' 

Upon this, the seamen rushed to the yard-arms, as in 
swarming-time the bees rush to the boughs. Bareheaded 
in the sultry sun, Ahab stood on the bowsprit, and with one 

350 



SQUID 351 

hand pushed far behind in readiness to wave his orders to 
the helmsman, cast his eager glance in the direction indi- 
cated aloft by the outstretched motionless arm of Daggoo. 

Whether the flitting attendance of the one still and 
solitary jet had gradually worked upon Ahab, so that he 
was now prepared to connect the ideas of mildness and 
repose with the first sight of the particular whale he 
pursued ; however this was, or whether his eagerness 
betrayed him ; whichever way it might have been, no 
sooner did he distinctly perceive the white mass, than with 
a quick intensity he instantly gave orders for lowering. 

The four boats were soon on the water ; Ahab's in 
advance, and all swiftly pulling toward their prey. Soon 
it went down, and while, with oars suspended, we were 
awaiting its reappearance, lo ! in the same spot where it 
sank, once more it slowly rose. Almost forgetting for 
the moment all thoughts of Moby-Dick, we now gazed 
at the most wondrous phenomenon which the secret seas 
have hitherto revealed to mankind. A vast pulpy mass, 
furlongs in length and breadth, of a glancing cream-colour, 
lay floating on the water, innumerable long arms radiating 
from its centre, and curling and twisting like a nest of 
anacondas, as if blindly to clutch at any hapless object 
within reach. No perceptible face or front did it have ; 
no conceivable token of either sensation or instinct ; but 
undulated there on the billows, an unearthly, formless, 
chance-like apparition of life. 

As with a low sucking sound it slowly disappeared again, 
Starbuck still gazing at the agitated waters where it had 
sunk, with a wild voice exclaimed ' Almost rather had 
I seen Moby-Dick and fought him, than to have seen thee, 
thou white ghost ! ' 

' What was it, sir ? ' said Flask. 

' The great live squid, which, they say, few whale-ships 
ever beheld, and returned to their ports to tell of it.' 



352 MOBY-DICK 

But Ahab said nothing ; turning his boat, he sailed 
back to the vessel ; the rest as silently following. 

Whatever superstitions the sperm whalemen in general 
have connected with the sight of this object, certain it is, 
that a glimpse of it being so very unusual, that circum- 
stance has gone far to invest it with portent ousness. So 
rarely is it beheld, that though one and all of them declare 
it to be the largest animated thing in the ocean, yet very 
few of them have any but the most vague ideas concern- 
ing its true nature and form ; notwithstanding, they 
believe it to furnish to the sperm whale his only food. 
For though other species of whales find their food above 
water, and may be seen by man in the act of feeding, the 
spermaceti whale obtains his whole food in unknown 
zones below the surface ; and .only by inference is it 
that any one can tell of what, precisely, that food consists. 
At times, when closely pursued, he will disgorge what are 
supposed to be the detached arms of the squid ; some of 
them thus exhibited exceeding twenty and thirty feet in 
length. They fancy that the monster to which these arms 
belonged ordinarily clings by them to the bed of the ocean ; 
and that the sperm whale, unlike other species, is supplied 
with teeth in order to attack and tear it. 

There seems some ground to imagine that the great 
Kraken of Bishop Pontoppodan may ultimately resolve 
itself into Squid. The manner in which the Bishop de- 
scribes it, as alternately rising and sinking, with some 
other particulars he narrates, in all this the two corre- 
spond. But much abatement is necessary with respect 
to the incredible bulk he assigns it. 

By some naturalists who have vaguely heard rumours 
of the mysterious creature, here spoken of, it is included 
among the class of cuttle-fish, to which, indeed, in certain 
external respects it would seem to belong, but only as the 
Anak of the tribe. 



CHAPTER LX 

THE LINE 

WITH reference to the whaling scene shortly to be de- 
scribed, as well as for the better understanding of all 
similar scenes elsewhere presented, I have here to speak 
of the magical, sometimes horrible whale-line. 

The line originally used in the fishery was of the best 
hemp, slightly vapoured with tar, not impregnated with 
it, as in the case of ordinary ropes ; for while tar, as 
ordinarily used, makes the hemp more pliable to the rope- 
maker, and also renders the rope itself more convenient 
to the sailor for common ship use ; yet, not only would 
the ordinary quantity too much stiffen the whale-line for 
the close coiling to which it must be subjected ; but as 
most seamen are beginning to learn, tar in general by 
no means adds to the rope's durability or strength, how- 
ever much it may give it compactness and gloss. 

Of late years the Manilla rope has in the American 
fishery almost entirely superseded hemp as a material 
for whale-lines ; for, though not so durable as hemp, it 
is stronger, and far more soft and elastic ; and I will add 
(since there is an aesthetics in all things), is much more 
handsome and becoming to the boat, than hemp. Hemp 
is a dusky, dark fellow, a sort of Indian ; but Manilla 
is as a golden-haired Circassian to behold. 

The whale-line is only two-thirds of an inch in thickness. 
At first sight, you would not think it so strong as it really 
is. By experiment its one and fifty yarns will each sus- 
pend a weight of one hundred and twenty pounds ; so 

VOL. i. z 



354 MOBY-DICK 

that the whole rope will bear a strain nearly equal to three 
tons. In length, the common sperm whale-line measures 
something over two hundred fathoms. Toward the 
stern of the boat it is spirally coiled away in the tub, not 
like the worm-pipe of a still though, but so as to form one 
round, cheese-shaped mass of densely bedded 'sheaves,' 
or layers of concentric spiralisations, without any hollow 
but the 'heart/ or minute vertical tube formed at the 
axis of the cheese. As the least tangle or kink in the 
coiling would, in running out, infallibly take somebody's 
arm, leg, or entire body off, the utmost precaution is 
used in stowing the line in its tub. Some harpooneers 
will consume almost an entire morning in this business, 
carrying the line high aloft and then reeving it downward 
through a block toward the tub, so as in the act of coiling 
to free it from all possible wrinkles and twists. 

In the English boats two tubs are used instead of one ; 
the same line being continuously coiled in both tubs. 
There is some advantage in this ; because these twin -tubs 
being so small they fit more readily into the boat, and do 
not strain it so much ; whereas, the American tub, nearly 
three feet in diameter and of proportionate depth, makes 
a rather bulky freight for a craft whose planks are but 
one half-inch in thickness ; for the bottom of the whale- 
boat is like critical ice, which will bear up a considerable 
distributed weight, but not very much of a concentrated 
one. When the painted canvas cover is clapped on the 
American line-tub, the boat looks as if it were pulling off 
with a prodigious great wedding-cake to present to the 
whales. 

Both ends of the line are exposed ; the lower end 
terminating in an eye -splice or loop coming up from the 
bottom against the side of the tub, and hanging over 
its edge completely disengaged from everything. This 
arrangement of the lower end is necessary on two accounts. 



THE LINE 355 

First : In order to facilitate the fastening to it of an 
additional line from a neighbouring boat, in case the 
stricken whale should sound so deep as to threaten to 
carry off the entire line originally attached to the har- 
poon. In these instances, the whale of course is shifted 
like a mug of ale, as it were, from the one boat to the 
other ; though the first boat always hovers at hand to 
assist its consort. Second : This arrangement is indis- 
pensable for common safety's sake ; for were the lower 
end of the line in any way attached to the boat, and were 
the whale then to run the line out to the end almost in a 
single, smoking minute as he sometimes does, he would 
not stop there, for the doomed boat would infallibly 
be dragged down after him into the profundity of the sea ; 
and in that case no town -crier would ever find her again. 

Before lowering the boat for the chase, the upper end 
of the line is taken aft from the tub, and passing round the 
logger-head there, is again carried forward the entire 
length of the boat, resting crosswise upon the loom or 
handle of every man's oar, so that it jogs against his wrist 
in rowing ; and also passing between the men, as they 
alternately sit at the opposite gunwales, to the leaded 
chocks or grooves in the extreme pointed prow of the boat, 
where a wooden pin or skewer the size of a common quill, 
prevents it from slipping out. From the chocks it hangs 
in a slight festoon over the bows, and is then passed inside 
the boat again ; and some ten or twenty fathoms (called 
box-line) being coiled upon the box in the bows, it con- 
tinues its way to the gunwale still a little further aft, and 
is then attached to the short -warp the rope which is 
immediately connected with the harpoon ; but previous 
to that connection, the short -warp goes through sundry 
mystifications too tedious to detail. 

Thus the whale-line folds the whole boat in its compli- 
cated coils, twisting and writhing around it in almost 



356 MOBY-DICK 

every direction. All the oarsmen are involved in its 
perilous contortions ; so that to the timid eye of the 
landsman, they seem as Indian jugglers, with the deadliest 
snakes sportively festooning their limbs. Nor can any 
son of mortal woman, for the first time, seat himself amid 
those hempen intricacies, and while straining his utmost 
at the oar, bethink him that at any unknown instant the 
harpoon may be darted, and all these horrible contortions 
be put in play like ringed lightnings ; he cannot be thus 
circumstanced without a shudder that makes the very 
marrow in his bones to quiver in him like a shaken jelly. 
Yet habit strange thing ! what cannot habit accom- 
plish ? Gayer sallies, more merry mirth, better jokes, 
and brighter repartees, you never heard over your 
mahogany, than you will hear over the half-inch white 
cedar of the whale-boat, when thus hung in hangman's 
nooses ; and, like the six burghers of Calais before King 
Edward, the six men composing the crew pull into the 
jaws of death, with a halter around every neck, as you 
may say. 

Perhaps a very little thought will now enable you to 
account for those repeated whaling disasters some few 
of which are casually chronicled of this man or that man 
being taken out of the boat by the line, and lost. For, 
when the line is darting out, to be seated then in the boat 
is like being seated in the midst of the manifold whizzings 
of a steam-engine in full play, when every flying beam, 
and shaft, and wheel, is grazing you. It is worse ; for 
you cannot sit motionless in the heart of these perils, 
because the boat is rocking like a cradle, and you are 
pitched one way and the other, without the slightest 
warning ; and only by a certain self-adjusting buoyancy 
and simultaneousness of volition and action can you 
escape being made a Mazeppa of, and run away with where 
the all-seeing sun himself could never pierce you out. 



THE LINE 357 

Again : as the profound calm which only apparently 
precedes and prophesies of the storm is perhaps more 
awful than the storm itself ; for, indeed, the calm 
is but the wrapper and envelope of the storm ; and con- 
tains it in itself, as the seemingly harmless rifle holds the 
fatal powder, and the ball, and the explosion ; so the 
graceful repose of the line, as it silently serpentines about 
the oarsmen before being brought into actual play this 
is a thing which carries more of true terror than any other 
aspect of this dangerous affair. But why say more ? 
All men live enveloped in whale -lines. All are born with 
halters round their necks ; but it is only when caught 
in the swift, sudden turn of death, that mortals realise 
the silent, subtle, ever-present perils of life. And if you 
be a philosopher, though seated in the whale-boat, you 
would not at heart feel one whit more of terror, than 
though seated before your evening fire with a poker, and 
not a harpoon, by your side. 



END OF VOL. I. 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



PS Melville,, Herman 

2384 Moby-Dick 

M6 

1922 

v.l ﻿
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75908 ***





Music and Bad Manners




  _By THE SAME AUTHOR_


  MUSIC AFTER THE GREAT WAR




  Music
  and Bad Manners

  _Carl Van Vechten_


  [Illustration]

  New York Alfred A. Knopf
  MCMXVI




  COPYRIGHT, 1916, BY
  ALFRED A. KNOPF

  _All rights reserved_


  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




_To my Father_




Contents


                                        PAGE

  MUSIC AND BAD MANNERS                   11

  MUSIC FOR THE MOVIES                    43

  SPAIN AND MUSIC                         57

  SHALL WE REALIZE WAGNER’S IDEALS?      135

  THE BRIDGE BURNERS                     169

  A NEW PRINCIPLE IN MUSIC               217

  LEO ORNSTEIN                           229




Music and Bad Manners




Music and Bad Manners


Singers, musicians of all kinds, are notoriously bad mannered. The
storms of the Titan, Beethoven, the petty malevolences of Richard
Wagner, the weak sulkiness of Chopin (“Chopin in displeasure was
appalling,” writes George Sand, “and as with me he always controlled
himself it was as if he might die of suffocation”) have all been
recalled in their proper places in biographies and in fiction; but
no attempt has been made heretofore, so far as I am aware, to lump
similar anecdotes together under the somewhat castigating title I
have chosen to head this article. Nor is it alone the performer who
gives exhibitions of bad manners. (As a matter of fact, once an
artist reaches the platform he is on his mettle, at his best. At home
he--or she--may be ruthless in his passionate display of floods of
“temperament.” I have seen a soprano throw a pork roast on the floor
at dinner, the day before a performance of Wagner’s “consecrational
festival play,” with the shrill explanation, “Pork before _Parsifal_!”
On the street he may shatter the clouds with his lightnings--as,
indeed, Beethoven is said to have done--but on the stage he becomes,
as a rule, a superhuman being, an interpreter, a mere virtuoso. Of
course, there are exceptions.) Audiences, as well, may be relied upon
to behave badly on occasion. An auditor is not necessarily at his best
in the concert hall. He may have had a bad dinner, or quarrelled with
his wife before arriving. At any rate he has paid his money and it
might be expected that he would make some demonstration of disapproval
when he was displeased. The extraordinary thing is that he does not
do so oftener. On the whole it must be admitted that audiences remain
unduly calm at concerts, that they are unreasonably polite, indeed, to
offensively inadequate or downright bad interpretations. I have sat
through performances, for example, of the Russian Symphony Society in
New York when I wondered how my fellow-sufferers could display such
fortitude and patience. When _Prince Igor_ was first performed at the
Metropolitan Opera House the ballet, danced in defiance of all laws of
common sense or beauty, almost compelled me to throw the first stone.
The parable saved me. Still one doesn’t need to be without sin to sling
pebbles in an opera house. And it is a pleasure to remember that there
have been occasions when audiences did speak up!

In those immeasurably sad pages in which Henry Fothergill Chorley
describes the last London appearance of Giuditta Pasta, recalling
Pauline Viardot’s beautiful remark (she, like Rachel, was hearing the
great dramatic soprano for the first time), “It is like the _Cenacolo_
of Da Vinci at Milan--a wreck of a picture, but the picture is the
greatest picture in the world!” this great chronicler of the glories
of the opera stage recalls the attitude of the French actress: “There
were artists present, who had then, for the first time, to derive some
impression of a renowned artist--perhaps, with the natural feeling that
her reputation had been exaggerated.--Among these was Rachel--whose
bitter ridicule of the entire sad show made itself heard throughout the
whole theatre, and drew attention to the place where she sat--one might
even say, sarcastically enjoying the scene.”

Chorley’s description of an incident in the career of the dynamic Mme.
Mara, a favourite in Berlin from 1771 to 1780, makes far pleasanter
reading: “On leave of absence being denied to her when she wished
to recruit her strength by a visit to the Bohemian _baden_, the
songstress took the resolution of neglecting her professional duties,
in the hope of being allowed to depart as worthless. The Czarovitch,
Paul the First of Russia, happened about that time to pay a visit to
Berlin; and she was announced to appear in one of the grand parts. She
pretended illness. The King sent her word, in the morning of the day,
that she was to get well and sing her best. She became, of course,
worse--could not leave her bed. Two hours before the opera began, a
carriage, escorted by eight soldiers, was at her door, and the captain
of the company forced his way into her chamber, declaring that their
orders were to bring her to the theatre, dead or alive. ‘You cannot;
you see I am in bed.’ ‘That is of little consequence,’ said the
obdurate machine; ‘we will take you, bed and all.’ There was nothing
for it but to get up and go to the theatre; dress, and resolve to sing
without the slightest taste or skill. And this Mara did. She kept her
resolution for the whole of the first act, till a thought suddenly
seized her that she might be punishing herself in giving the Grand-Duke
of Russia a bad opinion of her powers. A _bravura_ came; and she burst
forth with all her brilliancy, in particular distinguishing herself by
a miraculous shake, which she sustained, and swelled, and diminished,
with such wonderful art as to call down more applause than ever.” This
was the same Mara who walked out of the orchestra at a performance of
_The Messiah_ at Oxford rather than stand during the singing of the
_Hallelujah Chorus_.

In that curious series of anecdotes which Berlioz collected under
the title, “Les Grotesques de la Musique,” I discovered an account
of a performance of a _Miserere_ of Mercadante at the church of San
Pietro in Naples, in the presence of a cardinal and his suite. The
cardinal several times expressed his pleasure, and the congregation at
two points, the _Redde Mihi_ and the _Benigne fac, Domine_, broke in
with applause and insisted upon repetitions! Berlioz also describes
a rehearsal of Grétry’s _La Rosière de Salency_ at the Odéon, when
that theatre was devoted to opera. The members of the orchestra were
overcome with a sense of the ridiculous nature of the music they were
performing and made strange sounds the while they played. The _chef
d’orchestre_ attempted to keep his face straight, and Berlioz thought
he was scandalized by the scene. A little later, however, he found
himself laughing harder than anybody else. The memory of this occasion
gave him the inspiration some time later of arranging a concert of
works of this order (in which, he assured himself, the music of the
masters abounded), without forewarning the public of his purpose.
He prepared the programme, including therein this same overture of
Grétry’s, then a celebrated English air _Arm, Ye Brave_, a “sonata
_diabolique_” for the violin, the quartet from a French opera in which
this passage occurred:

    “J’aime assez les Hollandaises,
    Les Persanes, les Anglaises,
    Mais je préfère des Françaises
    L’esprit, la grâce et la gaîté,”

an instrumental march, the finale of the first act of an opera, a fugue
on _Kyrie Eleison_ from a Requiem Mass in which the music suggested
anything but the words, variations for the bassoon on the melody of
_Au Clair de la Lune_, and a symphony. Unfortunately for the trial
of the experiment the rehearsal was never concluded. The executants
got no further than the third number before they became positively
hysterical. The public performance was never given, but Berlioz assures
us that the average symphony concert audience would have taken the
programme seriously and asked for more! It may be considered certain
that in his choice of pieces Berlioz was making game of some of his
contemporaries....

In all the literature on the subject of music there are no more
delightful volumes to be met with than those of J. B. Weckerlin, called
“Musiciana,” “Nouveau Musiciana,” and “Dernier Musiciana.” These books
are made up of anecdotes, personal and otherwise. From Bourdelot’s
“Histoire de la Musique” Weckerlin culled the following: “An equerry
of Madame la Dauphine asked two of the court musicians to his home at
Versailles for dinner one evening. They sang standing opposite the
mantelpiece, over which hung a great mirror which was broken in six
pieces by the force of tone; all the porcelain on the buffet resounded
and shook.” Weckerlin also recalls a caprice of Louis XI, who one day
commanded the Abbé de Baigne, who had already invented many musical
instruments, to devise a harmony out of pigs. The Abbé asked for some
money, which was grudgingly given, and constructed a pavilion covered
with velvet, under which he placed a number of pigs. Before this
pavilion he arranged a white table with a keyboard constructed in such
a fashion that the displacing of a key stuck a pig with a needle. The
sounds evoked were out of the ordinary, and it is recorded that the
king was highly diverted and asked for more. Auber’s enthusiasm for his
own music, usually concealed under an indifferent air, occasionally
expressed itself in strange fashion. Mme. Damoreau recounted to
Weckerlin how, when the composer completed an air in the middle of the
night, even at three or four o’clock in the morning, he rushed to her
apartment. Dragging a pianoforte to her bed, he insisted on playing the
new song over and over to her, while she sang it, meanwhile making the
changes suggested by this extraordinary performance.

More modern instances come to mind. Maria Gay is not above nose-blowing
and expectoration in her interpretation of Carmen, physical acts in the
public performance of which no Spanish cigarette girl would probably
be caught ashamed. Yet it may be doubted if they suit the music of
Bizet, or the Meilhac and Halévy version of Merimée’s creation.... A
story has been related to me--I do not vouch for the truth of it--that
during a certain performance of _Carmen_ at the Opéra-Comique in Paris
a new singer, at some stage in the proceedings, launched that dreadful
French word which Georges Feydeau so ingenuously allowed his heroine to
project into the second act of _La Dame de chez Maxim_, with a result
even more startling than that which attended Bernard Shaw’s excursion
into the realms of the expletive in his play, _Pygmalion_. It is
further related of this performance of _Carmen_, which is said to have
sadly disturbed the “traditions,” that in the excitement incident to
her début the lady positively refused to allow Don José to kill her.
Round and round the stage she ran while the perspiring tenor tried in
vain to catch her. At length, the music of the score being concluded,
the curtain fell on a Carmen still alive; the _salle_ was in an uproar.

I find I cannot include Chaliapine’s Basilio in my list of bad mannered
stage performances, although his trumpetings into his handkerchief
disturbed many of New York’s professional writers. _Il Barbiere_ is
a farcical piece, and the music of Rossini hints at the Rabelaisian
humours of the dirty Spanish priest. In any event, it was the finest
interpretation of the rôle that I have ever seen or heard and, with
the splendid ensemble (Mme. Sembrich was the Rosina, Mr. Bonci, the
count, and Mr. Campanari, the Figaro), the comedy went with such joyous
abandon (the first act finale to the accompaniment of roars of laughter
from the stalls) that I am inclined to believe the performance could
not be bettered in this generation.

The late Algernon St. John Brenon used to relate a history about Emma
Eames and a recalcitrant tenor. The opera was _Lohengrin_, I believe,
and the question at issue was the position of a certain couch. Mme.
Eames wished it placed here; the tenor there. As always happens
in arguments concerning a Wagnerian music-drama, at some point the
Bayreuth tradition was invoked, although I have forgotten whether that
tradition favoured the soprano or her opponent in this instance. In
any case, at the rehearsal the tenor seemed to have won the battle.
When at the performance he found the couch in the exact spot which
had been designated by the lady his indignation was all the greater
on this account. With as much regard for the action of the drama as
was consistent with so violent a gesture he gave the couch a violent
shove with his projected toe, with the intention of pushing it into his
chosen locality. He retired with a howl, nursing a wounded member. The
couch had been nailed to the floor!

It is related that Marie Delna was discovered washing dishes at an inn
in a small town near Paris. Her benefactors took her to the capital
and placed her in the Conservatoire. She always retained a certain
peasant obstinacy, and it is said that during the course of her
instruction when she was corrected she frequently replied, “Je m’en
vais.” Against this phrase argument was unavailing and Mme. Delna, as
a result, acquired a habit of having her own way. Her Orphée was (and
still is, I should think) one of the notable achievements of our epoch.
It must have equalled Pauline Viardot’s performance dramatically,
and transcended it vocally. After singing the part several hundred
times she naturally acquired certain habits and mannerisms, tricks
both of action and of voice. Still, it is said that when she came to
the Metropolitan Opera House she offered, at a rehearsal, to defer
to Mr. Toscanini’s ideas. He, the rumour goes, gave his approval to
her interpretation on this occasion. Not so at the performance. Those
who have heard it can never forget the majesty and beauty of this
characterization, as noble a piece of stage work as we have seen or
heard in our day. At her début in the part in New York Mme. Delna was
superb, vocally and dramatically. In the celebrated air, _Che faro
senza Euridice_, the singer followed the tradition, doubly established
by the example of Mme. Viardot in the great revival of the mid-century,
of singing the different stanzas of the air in different _tempi_. In
her slowest _adagio_ the conductor became impatient. He beat his stick
briskly across his desk and whipped up the orchestra. There was soon
a hiatus of two bars between singer and musicians. It was a terrible
moment, but the singer won the victory. She _turned her back on the
conductor_ and continued to sing in her own time. The organ tones
rolled out and presently the audience became aware of a junction
between the two great forces. Mr. Toscanini was vanquished, but he
never forgave her.

During the opera season of 1915-16, opera-goers were treated to a
diverting exhibition. Mme. Geraldine Farrar, just returned from a fling
at three five-reel cinema dramas, elected to instil a bit of moving
picture realism into _Carmen_. Fresh with the memory of her prolonged
and brutal scuffle in the factory scene as it was depicted on the
screen, Mme. Farrar attempted something like it in the opera, the first
act of which was enlivened with sundry blows and kicks. More serious
still were her alleged assaults on the tenor (Mr. Caruso) in the third
act which, it is said, resulted in his clutching her like a struggling
eel, to prevent her interference with his next note. There was even
a suggestion of disagreement in the curtain calls which ensued. All
these incidents of an enlivening evening were duly and impressively
chronicled in the daily press.

There is, of course, Vladimir de Pachmann. Everybody who has attended
his recitals has come under the spell of his beautiful tone and has
been annoyed by his bad manners. For, curiously enough, the two
qualities have become inseparable with him, especially in recent
years. Once in Chicago I saw the strange little pianist sit down
in front of his instrument, rise again, gesticulate, and leave the
stage. Returning with a stage-hand he pointed to his stool; it was
not satisfactory. A chair was brought in, tried, and found wanting;
more gesticulation--this time wilder. At length, after considerable
discussion between Mr. de Pachmann and the stage-hand, all in view
of the audience, it was decided that nothing would do but that some
one must fetch the artist’s own piano bench from his hotel, which,
fortunately, adjoined the concert hall. This was accomplished in the
course of time. In the interval the pianist did not leave the platform.
He sat at the back on the chair which had been offered him as a
substitute for the offending stool and entertained his audience with a
spectacular series of grimaces.

On another occasion this singular genius arrested his fingers in the
course of a performance of one of Chopin’s études. His ears were
enraptured, it would seem, by his own rendition of a certain run; over
and over again he played it, now faster, now more slowly; at times
almost slowly enough to give the student in the front row a glimpse
of the magic fingering. With a sudden change of manner he announced,
“This is the way Godowsky would play this scale”: great velocity but a
dry tone. Then, “And now Pachmann again!” The magic fingers stroked the
keys.

Even as an auditor de Pachmann sometimes exploits his eccentricities.
Josef Hofmann once told me the following story: De Pachmann was sitting
in the third row at a concert Rubinstein gave in his prime. De Pachmann
burst into hilarious laughter, rocking to and fro. Rubinstein was
playing beautifully and de Pachmann’s neighbour, annoyed, demanded why
he was laughing. De Pachmann could scarcely speak as he pointed to the
pianist on the stage and replied, “He used the fourth finger instead of
the third in that run. Isn’t it funny?”

I cannot take Vladimir de Pachmann to task for these amusing bad
manners! But they annoy the _bourgeois_. We should most of us be glad
to have Oscar Wilde brilliant at our dinner parties, even though he
ate peas with his knife; and Napoleon’s generalship would have been
as effective if he had been an omnivorous reader of the works of
Laura Jean Libbey. But one must not dwell too long on de Pachmann.
One might be tempted to devote an entire essay to the relation of his
eccentricities.

Another pianist, also a composer, claims attention: Alberto Savinio.
You may find a photolithograph of Savinio’s autograph manuscript of
_Bellovées Fatales, No. 12_, in that curious periodical entitled “291,”
the number for April, 1915. There is a programme, which reads as
follows:


LA PASSION DES ROTULES

  La Femme: Ah! Il m’a touché de sa jambe de caoutchouc! Ma-ma! Ma-ma!

  L’Homme: Tutto s’ha di rosa, Maria, per te....

  La Femme: Ma-ma! Ma-ma!

There are indications as to how the composer wishes his music to be
played, sometimes _glissando_ and sometimes “_avec des poings_.” The
rapid and tortuous passages between the black and white keys would
test the contortionistic qualities of any one’s fingers. Savinio,
it is said, at his appearances in Paris, actually played until his
fingers _bled_. When he had concluded, indeed, the ends of his fingers
were crushed and bruised and the keyboard was red with blood. Albert
Gleizes, quoted by Walter Conrad Arensberg, is my authority for this
bizarre history of music and bad manners. I have not seen (or heard)
Savinio perform. But when I told this tale to Leo Ornstein he assured
me that he frequently had had a similar experience.

Romain Rolland in “Jean-Christophe” relates an incident which is
especially interesting because it has a foundation in fact. Something
of the sort happened to Hugo Wolf when an orchestra performed his
_Penthesilea_ overture for the first time. It is a curious example of
bad manners in which both the performers and the audience join.

“At last it came to Christophe’s symphony.” (I am quoting from Gilbert
Cannan’s translation.) “He saw from the way the orchestra and the
people in the hall were looking at his box that they were aware of his
presence. He hid himself. He waited with the catch at his heart which
every musician feels at the moment when the conductor’s wand is raised
and the waters of the music gather in silence before bursting their
dam. He had never yet heard his work played. How would the creatures of
his dreams live? How would their voices sound? He felt their roaring
within him; and he leaned over the abyss of sounds waiting fearfully
for what should come forth.

“What did come forth was a nameless thing, a shapeless hotchpotch.
Instead of the bold columns which were to support the front of the
building the chords came crumbling down like a building in ruins; there
was nothing to be seen but the dust of mortar. For a moment Christophe
was not quite sure whether they were really playing his work. He cast
back for the train, the rhythm of his thoughts; he could not recognize
it; it went on babbling and hiccoughing like a drunken man clinging
close to the wall, and he was overcome with shame, as though he himself
had been seen in that condition. It was to no avail to think that he
had not written such stuff; when an idiotic interpreter destroys a
man’s thoughts he has always a moment of doubt when he asks himself
in consternation if he is himself responsible for it. The audience
never asks such a question; the audience believes in the interpreter,
in the singers, in the orchestra whom they are accustomed to hear, as
they believe in their newspaper; they cannot make a mistake; if they
say absurd things, it is the absurdity of the author. This audience
was the less inclined to doubt because it liked to believe. Christophe
tried to persuade himself that the _Kapellmeister_ was aware of the
hash and would stop the orchestra and begin again. The instruments were
not playing together. The horn had missed his beat and had come in a
bar too late; he went on for a few minutes and then stopped quietly
to clean his instrument. Certain passages for the oboe had absolutely
disappeared. It was impossible for the most skilled ear to pick up
the thread of the musical idea, or even to imagine there was one.
Fantastic instrumentations, humoristic sallies became grotesque through
the coarseness of the execution. It was lamentably stupid, the work of
an idiot, of a joker who knew nothing of music. Christophe tore his
hair. He tried to interrupt, but the friend who was with him held him
back, assuring him that the _Herr Kapellmeister_ must surely see the
faults of the execution and would put everything right--that Christophe
must not show himself and that if he made any remark it would have a
very bad effect. He made Christophe sit at the very back of the box.
Christophe obeyed, but he beat his head with his fists; and every fresh
monstrosity drew from him a groan of indignation and misery.

“‘The wretches! The wretches!...’

“He groaned and squeezed his hands tight to keep from crying out.

“Now mingled with the wrong notes there came up to him the muttering
of the audience, who were beginning to be restless. At first it was
only a tremor; but soon Christophe was left without a doubt; they were
laughing. The musicians of the orchestra had given the signal; some
of them did not conceal their hilarity. The audience, certain then
that the music was laughable, rocked with laughter. This merriment
became general; it increased at the return of a very rhythmical motif
with the double-basses accentuated in a burlesque fashion. Only the
_Kapellmeister_ went on through the uproar imperturbably beating time.

“At last they reached the end (the best things come to an end). It was
the turn of the audience. They exploded with delight, an explosion
which lasted for several minutes. Some hissed; others applauded
ironically; the wittiest of all shouted ‘Encore!’ A bass voice coming
from a stage box began to imitate the grotesque motif. Other jokers
followed suit and imitated it also. Some one shouted ‘Author!’ It was
long since these witty folk had been so highly entertained.

“When the tumult was calmed down a little the _Kapellmeister_, standing
quite impassive with his face turned towards the audience, though he
was pretending not to see it (the audience was still supposed to be
non-existent), made a sign to the audience that he was about to speak.
There was a cry of ‘Ssh,’ and silence. He waited a moment longer; then
(his voice was curt, cold, and cutting):

“‘Gentlemen,’ he said, ‘I should certainly not have let _that_ be
played through to the end if I had not wished to make an example of
the gentleman who has dared to write offensively of the great Brahms.’

“That was all; jumping down from his stand he went out amid cheers from
the delighted audience. They tried to recall him; the applause went on
for a few minutes longer. But he did not return. The orchestra went
away. The audience decided to go too. The concert was over.

“It had been a good day.”

Von Bülow once stopped his orchestra at a public performance to
remonstrate with a lady with a fan in the front row of seats. “Madame,”
he said gravely, “I must beg you to cease fanning yourself in
three-four time while I am conducting in four-four time!”

Here are a few personal recollections of bad mannered audiences. A
performance of _The Magic Flute_ in Chicago comes to mind. Fritzi
Scheff, the Papagena, and Giuseppe Campanari, the Papageno, had
concluded their duet in the last act amidst a storm of applause, in
face of which the conductor sped on to the entrance of the Queen of the
Night. Mme. Sembrich entered and sang a part of her recitative unheard.
One could see, however, that her jaws opened and closed with the
mechanism incidental to tone-production. After a few bars she retired
defeated and the bad mannered audience continued to shout and applaud
until that unspeakable bit of nonsense which runs “Pa-pa-pa,” etc., was
repeated. Mme. Sembrich appeared no more that day.

Another stormy audience I encountered at a concert of the Colonne
Orchestra in Paris. Those who sit in the gallery at these concerts at
the Chatelet Theatre are notoriously opinionated. There the battles of
Richard Strauss and Debussy have been fought. The gallery crowd always
comes early because seats in the top of the house are unreserved. They
cost a franc or two; I forget exactly how much, but I have often sat
there. To pass the time until the concert begins, and also to show
their indifference to musical literature and the opinions of others,
the galleryites fashion a curious form of spill, with one end in a
point and the other feathered like an arrow, out of the pages of the
annotated programmes. These are then sent sailing, in most instances
with infinite dexterity and incredible velocity, over the heads of the
arriving audience. The objective point is the very centre of the back
cloth on the stage, a spot somewhat above the kettle-drum. A successful
shot always brings forth a round of applause. But this is (or was) an
episode incident to any Colonne concert. I am describing an occasion.

The concert took place during the season of poor Colonne’s final
illness (now he lies buried in that curiously remote avenue of
Père-Lachaise where repose the ashes of Oscar Wilde). Gabriel Pierné,
his successor, had already assumed the bâton, and he conducted the
concert in question. Anton Van Rooy was the soloist and he had chosen
to sing two very familiar (and very popular in Paris) Wagner excerpts,
Wotan’s Farewell from _Die Walküre_, and the air which celebrates the
evening star from _Tannhäuser_. (In this connection I might state that
in this same winter--1908-9--_Das Rheingold_ was given _in concert
form_--it had not yet been performed at the Opéra--on two consecutive
Sundays at the Lamoureux Concerts in the Salle Gaveau to _standing room
only_.) The concert proceeded in orderly fashion until Mr. Van Rooy
appeared; then the uproar began. The gallery hooted, and screamed,
and yelled. All the terrible noises which only a Paris crowd can
invent were hurled from the dark recesses of that gallery. The din was
appalling, terrifying. Mr. Van Rooy nervously fingered a sheet of music
he held in his hands. Undoubtedly visions of the first performance of
_Tannhäuser_ at the Paris Opéra passed through his mind. He may also
have considered the possibility of escaping to the Gare du Nord, with
the chance of catching a train for Germany before the mob could tear
him into bits. Mr. Pierné, who knew his Paris, faced the crowd, while
the audience below peered up and shuddered, with something of the
fright of the aristocrats during the first days of the Revolution. Then
he held up his hand and, in time, the modest gesture provoked a modicum
of silence. In that silence some one shrieked out the explanation:
“_Tannhäuser_ avant _Walküre_.” That was all. The gallery was not
satisfied with the order of the programme. The readjustment was quickly
made, the parts distributed to the orchestra, and Mr. Van Rooy sang
Wolfram’s air before Wotan’s. It may be said that never could he have
hoped for a more complete ovation, a more flattering reception than
that which the Parisian audience accorded him when he had finished. The
applause was veritably deafening.

I have related elsewhere at some length my experiences at the first
Paris performance of Igor Strawinsky’s ballet, _The Sacrifice to the
Spring_, an appeal to primitive emotion through a nerve-shattering use
of rhythm, staged in ultra-modern style by Waslav Nijinsky. Chords
and legs seemed disjointed. Flying arms synchronized marvellously
with screaming clarinets. But this first audience would not permit the
composer to be heard. Cat-calls and hisses succeeded the playing of
the first few bars, and then ensued a battery of screams, countered
by a foil of applause. We warred over art (some of us thought it was
and some thought it wasn’t). The opposition was bettered at times;
at any rate it was a more thrilling battle than Strauss conceived
between the Hero and his enemies in _Heldenleben_ and the celebrated
scenes from _Die Meistersinger_ and _The Rape of the Lock_ could not
stand the comparison. Some forty of the protestants were forced out
of the theatre but that did not quell the disturbance. The lights in
the auditorium were fully turned on but the noise continued and I
remember Mlle. Piltz executing her strange dance of religious hysteria
on a stage dimmed by the blazing light in the auditorium, seemingly to
the accompaniment of the disjointed ravings of a mob of angry men and
women. Little by little, at subsequent performances of the work the
audiences became more mannerly, and when it was given in concert in
Paris the following year it was received with applause.

Some of my readers may remember the demonstration directed (supposedly)
against American singers when the Metropolitan Opera Company invaded
Paris some years ago for a spring season. The opening opera was _Aïda_,
and all went well until the first scene of the second act, in which
the reclining Amneris chants her thoughts while her slaves dance. Here
the audience began to give signs of disapproval, which presently broke
out into open hissing, and finally into a real hullabaloo. Mme. Homer,
nothing daunted, continued to sing. She afterwards told me that she
had never sung with such force and intensity. And in a few moments she
broke the spell, and calmed the riot.

Arthur Nikisch once noted that players of the bassoon were more
sensitive than the other members of his orchestra; he found them
subject to quick fits of temper, and intolerant of criticism. He
attributed this to the delicate mechanism of the instrument which
required the nicest apportionment of breath. Clarinet players, he
discovered, were less sensitive. One could joke with them in reason;
while horn players were as tractable as Newfoundland dogs!--A case of a
sensitive pianist comes to mind, brought to bay by as rude an audience
as I can recall. Mr. Paderewski was playing Beethoven’s C sharp minor
sonata at one of these morning musicales arranged at the smart hotels
so that the very rich may see more intimately the well-known artists of
the concert and opera stage, when some women started to go out. In his
following number, Couperin’s _La Bandoline_, the interruption became
intolerable and he stopped playing. “Those who do not wish to hear me
will kindly leave the room immediately,” he said, “and those who wish
to remain will kindly take their seats.” The outflow continued, while
those who remained seated began to hiss. “I am astonished to find
people in New York leaving while an artist is playing,” the pianist
added. Then some one started to applaud; the applause deepened, and
finally Mr. Paderewski consented to play again and took his place on
the bench before his instrument.

The incident was the result of the pianist’s well-known aversion to
appearing in conjunction with other artists. He had finally agreed to
do so on this occasion provided he would be allowed to play after the
others had concluded their performances. There had been many recalls
for the singer and violinist who preceded him and it was well after
one o’clock (the concert had begun at eleven) before he walked on
the platform. Now one o’clock is a very late hour at a fashionable
morning musicale. Some of those present were doubtless hungry; others,
perhaps, had trains to catch; while there must have been a goodly
number who had heard all the music they wanted to hear that morning.
There was a very pretty ending to the incident. Once he had begun, Mr.
Paderewski played for an hour and twenty minutes, and the faithful
ones, who had remained seated, applauded so much when he finally rose
from the bench, even after he had added several numbers to the printed
programme, that the echoes of the clapping hands accompanied him to his
motor.

I have reserved for the last a description of a concert given at the
Dal Verme Theatre in Milan by the Italian Futurists. The account is
culled from the “Corriere della Sera” of that city, and the translation
is that which appeared in “International Music and Drama”:

“At the Dal Verme a Futurist concert of ‘intonarumori’ was to be held
last night, but instead of this there was an uproarious din intoned
both by the public and the Futurists which ended in a free-for-all
fight.

“In a speech which was listened to with sufficient attention,
Marinetti, the poet, announced that this was to be the first public
trial of a new device invented by Luigi Russelo, a Futurist painter.
This instrument is called the ‘noise-maker’ and its purpose is to
render a new kind of music. Modern life vibrates with all sorts of
noises; music therefore must render this sensation. This, in brief, is
the idea. In order to develop it Russelo had invented several types of
noise-makers, each of which renders a different sound.

“After Marinetti’s speech the curtain went up and the new orchestra
appeared in all its glory amidst the bellowings of the public. The
famous ‘noise-intonators’ proved to be made out of a sort of bass-drum
with an immense trumpet attached to it, the latter looking very much
like a gramaphone horn. Behind the instrument sat the players, whose
only function was to turn the crank rhythmically in order to create the
harmonic noise. They looked, while performing this agreeable task, like
a squad of knife-grinders. But it was impossible to hear the music. The
public was unconditionally intolerant. We only caught here and there a
faint buzz and growl. Then everything was drowned in the billowing seas
of howls, jeers, hisses, and cat-calls. What they were hissing at, it
being impossible to hear the music, was not quite clear. They hissed
just for the fun of it. It was a case of art for art’s sake. Painter
Russelo, however, continued undisturbed to direct his mighty battery
of musical howitzers and his professors kept on grinding their pieces
with a beautiful serenity of mind, all the while the tumult increasing
to redoubtable proportions. The consequence was that those who went
to the Dal Verme for the purpose of listening to Futurist music had
to give up all hopes and resign themselves to hear the bedlam of the
public.

“In vain did Marinetti attempt to speak, begging them to be quiet for
a while and assuring them that they would be allowed a whole carnival
of howls at the end of the concert--the public wanted to hiss and there
was no way to check it. But Russelo kept right on. He conducted with
imperturbable solemnity the three pieces we were supposed to hear: _The
Awakening of a Great City_, _A Dinner on a Kursaal Terrace_, and _A
Meet of Automobiles and Aeroplanes_. Nobody heard anything, but Russelo
rendered everything conscientiously. The only thing we were able to
find out about Futurist music is that the noise of the orchestra is by
no means too loud, or at least not louder than impromptu choruses.

“But the worst was reserved for the middle of the third piece. The
exchange of hot words and very old-fashioned courtesies had now become
ultra-vivacious and was being punctuated with several projectiles and
an occasional blow. At this point, Marinetti, Boccioni, Carra, and
other Futurists jumped into the pit and began to distribute all sorts
of blows to the infuriated spectators. The new Futurist style enables
us to synthesize the scene. Blows. Carbineers. Inspectors. Cushions and
chairs flying about. Howls. Public standing on chairs. Concert goes
on. More howls, shrieks, curses, and thunderous insults. Futurists are
led back to stage by gendarmes. Public slowly passes out. Marinetti
and followers pass out before public. Again howls, invectives,
guffaws, and fist blows. Piazza Cardusio. More blows. Galleria. Ditto.
Futurists enter Savini’s café while pugilistic matches go merrily on.
Mob attempts to storm stronghold. Iron gates close. Futurists are shut
in, in good condition, save few torn hats. Mob slowly calms down and
disperses. The end.”


_New York, May, 1916._




  Music for the Movies

  “_O Tempora! O Movies!_”

                     W. B. Chase.




Music for the Movies


Despite the fact that it would seem that the moving picture drama had
opened up new worlds to the modern musician, no important composer,
so far as I am aware, has as yet turned his attention to the writing
of music for the films. If the cinema drama is in its infancy, as
some would have us believe, then we may be sure that the time is not
far distant when moving picture scores will take their places on the
musicians’ book-shelves alongside those of operas, symphonies, masses,
and string quartets. In the meantime, entirely ignorant of the truth
(or oblivious to it, or merely helpless, as the case may be) that
writing music for moving pictures is a new art, which demands a new
point of view, the directors of the picture theatres are struggling
with the situation as best they may. Under the circumstances it is
remarkable, on the whole, how swiftly and how well the demand for music
with the silent drama has been met. Certainly the music is usually on
a level with (or of a better quality than) the type of entertainment
offered. But the directors have not definitely tackled the problem;
they still continue to try to force old wine into new bottles,
arranging and re-arranging melody and harmony which was contrived for
quite other occasions and purposes. Even when scores have been written
for pictures the result has not shown any imaginative advance over the
arranged score. It is strange, but it has occurred to no one that the
moving picture demands a _new_ kind of music.

The composers, I should imagine, are only waiting to be asked to write
it. Certainly none of them has ever shown any hesitancy about composing
incidental music for the spoken drama. Mendelssohn wrote strains for
_A Midsummer Night’s Dream_ which seemed pledged to immortality until
Granville Barker ignored them; the Wedding March is still in favour
in Kankakee and Keokuk. Beethoven illustrated Goethe’s _Egmont_; Sir
Arthur Sullivan penned a score for _The Tempest_; Schubert was inspired
to put down some of his most ravishing notes for a stupid play called
_Rosamunde_; Grieg’s _Peer Gynt_ music is more often performed than
the play. More recent instances of incidental music for dramas are
Saint-Saëns’s score for Brieux’s _La Foi_, Mascagni’s for _The Eternal
City_, and Richard Strauss’s for _Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme_. Is it
necessary to continue the list? I have only, after all, put down a few
of the obvious examples (passing by the thousands upon thousands of
scores devised by lesser composers for lesser plays) that would spring
at once to any musician’s mind. Of course it has usually been the
poetic drama (do we ever hear Shakespeare or Rostand without it?) which
has seemed to call for incidental music but it has accompanied (with
more or less disastrous consequences, to be sure) the unfolding of many
a “drawing-room” play; especially during the eighties.

When the first moving picture was exposed on the screen it seems to
have occurred to its projector at once that some kind of music must
accompany its unreeling. The silence evidently appalled him. A moving
picture is not unlike a ballet in that it depends entirely upon action
(it differs from a ballet in that the action is not necessarily
rhythmic)--and whoever heard of a ballet performed without music? Sound
certainly has its value in creating an atmosphere and in emphasizing
the “thrill” of the moving picture, especially when the sound is
selected and co-ordinated. It may also divert the attention. On the
whole, more photographed plays follow the general lines of _Lady
Windemere’s Fan_ or _Peg o’ My Heart_ than of poetic dramas such as
_Cymbeline_ or _La Samaritaine_. The problem here, however, is not
the same as in the spoken drama. For in motion pictures a poetic
play sheds its poetry and becomes, like its neighbour, a skeleton of
action. There is no conceivable distinction in the “movies” (beyond
one created by preference, or taste, or the quality of the performance
and the photography) between Dante’s _Inferno_ and a picture in which
the beloved Charles Chaplin looms large. The directors of the moving
picture companies have tried to meet this problem; that they have not
wholly succeeded so far is not entirely their fault.

It is no easy matter, for example, in a theatre in which the films are
changed daily (this is the general rule even in the larger houses), for
the musicians (or musician) to arrange a satisfactory accompaniment
for 5,000 feet of action which includes everything from an earthquake
in Cuba to a dinner in Park Lane, and it is scarcely possible, even if
the distributors be so inclined (as they frequently are nowadays) to
furnish a music score which will answer the purposes of the different
sized bands, ranging from a full orchestra to an upright piano, _solo_.
As for the pictures without pre-arranged scores, the orchestra leaders
and pianists must do the best they can with them.

In some houses there is an attitude of total disrespect paid towards
the picture by the _chef d’orchestre_. He arranges his musical
programme as if he were giving a concert, not at all with a view to
effectively accompanying the picture. In a theatre on Second Avenue
in New York, for example, I have heard an orchestra play the whole
of Beethoven’s First Symphony as an accompaniment to Irene Fenwick’s
performance of _The Woman Next Door_. As the symphony came to an
end before the picture it was supplemented by a Waldteufel waltz,
_Les Patineurs_. The result, in this instance, was not altogether
incongruous or even particularly displeasing, and it occurred to me
that if one had to listen to music while the third act of _Hedda
Gabler_ were being enacted one would prefer to hear something like
Boccherini’s celebrated minuet or a light Mozart dance rather than
anything ostensibly contrived to fit the situation. In the latter
instance the result would be sure to be unbearable bathos.

On the other hand there are certain players for pictures who remind one
by their methods of the anxiety of Richard Strauss to describe every
peacock and bean mentioned in any of his opera-books. If a garden is
exposed on the screen one hears _The Flowers That Bloom in the Spring_;
a love scene is the signal for _Un Peu d’Amour_; a cross or any
religious episode suggests _The Rosary_ to these ingenuous musicians;
Japan brings a touch of _Madame Butterfly_; a proposal of marriage,
_O Promise Me_; and a farewell, Tosti’s _Good-bye!_ This expedient of
appealing through the intellect to the emotions, it may be admitted,
has the stamp of approval of no less a composer than Richard Wagner.

Lacking the authority of real moving picture music (which a new
composer must rise to invent) the safest way (not necessarily the
_best_ way) is the middle course--one method for this, another for
that. One of the difficulties is to arrange a music score for a theatre
with a large orchestra, where the leader must plan his score--or have
it planned for him--for an entire picture before his orchestra can
play a note. Music cues must be definite: twenty bars of _Alexander’s
Ragtime Band_, seventeen of _The Ride of the Valkyries_, ten of _Vissi
d’Arte_, etc. An ingenious young man has discovered a way by which
music and action may be exactly synchronized. I feel the impulse to
quote extensively from the somewhat vivid report of his achievement,
published in one of the motion picture weekly journals: “Here was a
man-sized job--how to measure the action of the picture to the musical
score, so that they would both come out equal at every part of the
picture, and would be so exact that any orchestra might take the score
and follow the movement of the play with absolute correctness. It was
a question primarily of mathematics, but even so it was some time
before a system of computation was devised before the undertaking was
gotten down to a certainty. As an illustration, on the opening night of
one of the most notable photoplay productions now before the public,
the orchestra, notwithstanding a three weeks’ rehearsal, found at the
conclusion of the picture that it was a page and a half behind the
play’s action in the musical setting.” Then we learn that Frank Stadler
of New York “provided the remedy for this condition of affairs.” It
is impossible to resist the temptation to quote further from this
extremely racy account. “He remembered that Beethoven had overcome
the difficulty of proper timing for his sonatas by a mechanical
arrangement known as the metronome, invented by a friend of his. This
is an arrangement with a little bell attached which may be set for the
movement of the music and used as an exact guide to the right measure,
the bell giving warning at the expiration of each period so that the
leader knows whether he is in time or not.” Mr. Stadler then began the
measurement of a film with a metronome, a stenographer, and a watch.
He found that the film ran ten feet to every eight seconds and he set
the metronome for eight second periods accordingly. “The stenographer
made a note of the action of the picture each time the bell rang, with
the result that when the entire picture had been run Mr. Stadler had a
complete record of the production. All that was necessary then was to
select from the classics and the popular melodies the music which would
give a suitable atmosphere and a harmonious accompaniment to the theme
of the play, so synchronizing the music with the eight second periods
that every bar of it fitted the spirit of the many score of scenes of
the production.”

The single man orchestra, the player of the upright piano, need not
make so many preparatory gestures. He may with impunity, if he be of
an inventive turn of mind, or if his memory be good, improvise his
score as the picture unreels itself for the first time before what
may very well be his astonished vision; and, after that, he may vary
his accompaniment, as the shows of the day progress, improving it
here or there, or not, as the case may be, keeping generally as near
to his original performance as possible. Of course he puts a good
deal of reliance on rum-ti-tum shivery passages (known to orchestra
leaders as “_agits_”--an abbreviation of _agitato_; a page or two
of them is distributed to every member of a moving picture band) to
accompany moments of excitement. This music you will remember if you
have ever attended a performance of a Lincoln J. Carter melodrama in
which a train was wrecked, or a hero rescued from the teeth of a saw,
or a heroine pursued by bloodhounds. (Those were the good old days!)
Recently I heard a pianist in a moving picture house on Fourteenth
Street in New York eke out a half-hour with similar poundings on two
or three well used chords (well used even in the time of Hadyn). The
scenes represented the whole of a two-act opera, and the ambitious
pianist was trying to give his audience the effect of singers
(principals and chorus) and orchestra with his three chords. (Shades of
Arnold Schoenberg!)

A certain periodical devoted to the interests of the moving picture
trade, conducts a department as first aid to the musical conductors
and pianists who figure at these shows. In a recent number the editor
of this department gives it as his solemn opinion that musicians who
read fiction are the best equipped for picture playing. Then, with an
almost tragic parenthesis, he continues, “Reading fiction is the last
diversion that the average musician will follow. He feels that all
the necessary romance is to be found in his music.” Facts are dead,
says this editor in substance, but fiction is living and should make
you weep. When you cry, all that remains for you to do is to think of
a tune which will synchronize with the cause of your tears; this will
serve you later when a similar scene occurs in a film drama.

There is one tune which any capable moving picture pianist has found
will synchronize with any Keystone picture (for the benefit of the
uninitiated I may state that in the Keystone farces some one gets
kicked or knocked down or spat upon several times in almost every
scene). I do not know what the tune is, but wherever Keystone pictures
are shown, in Cedar Rapids, Iowa; Grand Rapids, Michigan; Chicago, and
even New York, I have heard it. When a character falls into the water
(and at least ten of them invariably do) the pianist may vary the tune
by sitting on the piano or by upsetting a chair. In one theatre I have
known him to cause glass to be shattered behind the screen at a moment
when the picture exposed a similar scene. How Marinetti would like that!

However, the day of this sort of thing is rapidly approaching its
close, I venture to say. Some of the firms are already issuing arranged
music scores for their productions (one may note in passing the score
which accompanied Geraldine Farrar’s screen performance of _Carmen_,
largely selected from the music of Bizet’s opera, and Victor Herbert’s
original score for _The Fall of a Nation_, a score which does not take
full advantage of the new technique of the cinema drama). It will
not be long before an enterprising director engages an enterprising
musician to compose music for a picture. For the same reason that
d’Annunzio, very early in the career of the moving picture, wrote a
scenario for a film, I should not be surprised to learn that Richard
Strauss was under contract to construct an accompaniment to a screened
drama. It will be very loud music and it will require an orchestra of
143 men to interpret it and probably the composer himself will conduct
the first performance, and, later, excerpts will be given by the Boston
Symphony Orchestra and the critics will say, in spite of Philip Hale’s
diverting programme notes, that this music should never be played
except in conjunction with the picture for which it was written.
Mascagni is another composer who should find an excellent field for his
talent in writing tone-poems for pictures, although he would contrive
nothing more daring than a well-arranged series of illustrative
melodies.

But put Igor Strawinsky, or some other modern genius, to work on this
problem and see what happens! The musician of the future should revel
in the opportunity the moving picture gives him to create a new form.
This form differs from that of the incidental music for a play in that
the flow of tone may be continuous and because one never needs to
soften the accompaniment so that the voices may be heard; it differs
from the music for a ballet in that the scene shifts constantly,
and consequently the time signatures and the mood and the key must
be as constantly shifting. The swift flash from scene to scene, the
“cut-back,” the necessary rapidity of the action, all are adapted to
inspire the futurist composer to brilliant effort; a tinkle of this and
a smash of that, without “working-out” or development; illustration,
comment, piquant or serious, that’s what the new film music should
be. The ultimate moving picture score will be something more than
sentimental accompaniment.


_New York, November 10, 1915._




  Spain and Music

  “_Il faut méditerraniser la musique._”

                                       Nietzsche.




Spain and Music


It has seemed to me at times that Oscar Hammerstein was gifted with
almost prophetic vision. He it was who imagined the glory of Times
(erstwhile Longacre) Square. Theatre after theatre he fashioned in what
was then a barren district--and presently the crowds and the hotels
came. He foresaw that French opera, given in the French manner, would
be successful again in New York, and he upset the calculations of all
the wiseacres by making money even with _Pelléas et Mélisande_, that
esoteric collaboration of Belgian and French art, which in the latter
part of the season of 1907-8 attained a record of seven performances
at the Manhattan Opera House, all to audiences as vast and as devoted
as those which attend the sacred festivals of _Parsifal_ at Bayreuth.
And he had announced for presentation during the season of 1908-9
(and again the following season) a Spanish opera called _Dolores_.
If he had carried out his intention (why it was abandoned I have
never learned; the scenery and costumes were ready) he would have had
another honour thrust upon him, that of having been beforehand in the
production of modern Spanish opera in New York, an honour which, in
the circumstances, must go to Mr. Gatti-Casazza. (Strictly speaking,
_Goyescas_ was not the first Spanish opera to be given in New York,
although it was the first to be produced at the Metropolitan Opera
House. _Il Guarany_, by Antonio Carlos Gomez, a Portuguese born in
Brazil, was performed by the “Milan Grand Opera Company” during a three
weeks’ season at the Star Theatre in the fall of 1884. An air from
this opera is still in the répertoire of many sopranos. To go still
farther back, two of Manuel Garcia’s operas, sung of course in Italian,
_l’Amante Astuto_ and _La Figlia dell’Aria_, were performed at the Park
Theatre in 1825 with Maria Garcia--later to become the celebrated Mme.
Malibran--in the principal rôles. More recently an itinerant Italian
opéra-bouffe company, which gravitated from the Park Theatre--not the
same edifice that harboured Garcia’s company!--to various playhouses
on the Bowery, included three zarzuelas in its répertoire. One of
these, the popular _La Gran Via_, was announced for performance,
but my records are dumb on the subject and I am not certain that
it was actually given. There are probably other instances.) Mr.
Hammerstein had previously produced two operas _about_ Spain when he
opened his first Manhattan Opera House on the site now occupied by
Macy’s Department Store with Moszkowski’s _Boabdil_, quickly followed
by Beethoven’s _Fidelio_. The malagueña from _Boabdil_ is still a
favourite _morceau_ with restaurant orchestras, and I believe I have
heard the entire ballet suite performed by the Chicago Orchestra under
the direction of Theodore Thomas. New York’s real occupation by the
Spaniards, however, occurred after the close of Mr. Hammerstein’s
brilliant seasons, although the earlier vogue of Carmencita, whose
celebrated portrait by Sargent in the Luxembourg Gallery in Paris will
long preserve her fame, the interest in the highly-coloured paintings
by Sorolla and Zuloaga, many of which are still on exhibition in
private and public galleries in New York, the success here achieved, in
varying degrees, by such singing artists as Emilio de Gogorza, Andrea
de Segurola, and Lucrezia Bori, the performances of the piano works of
Albeniz, Turina, and Granados by such pianists as Ernest Schelling,
George Copeland, and Leo Ornstein, and the amazing Spanish dances of
Anna Pavlowa (who in attempting them was but following in the footsteps
of her great predecessors of the nineteenth century, Fanny Elssler and
Taglioni), all fanned the flames.

The winter of 1915-16 beheld the Spanish blaze. Enrique Granados,
one of the most distinguished of contemporary Spanish pianists and
composers, a man who took a keen interest in the survival, and
artistic use, of national forms, came to this country to assist at the
production of his opera _Goyescas_, sung in Spanish at the Metropolitan
Opera House for the first time anywhere, and was also heard several
times here in his interpretative capacity as a pianist; Pablo Casals,
the Spanish ’cellist, gave frequent exhibitions of his finished art,
as did Miguel Llobet, the guitar virtuoso; La Argentina (Señora Paz
of South America) exposed her ideas, somewhat classicized, of Spanish
dances; a Spanish soprano, Maria Barrientos, made her North American
début and justified, in some measure, the extravagant reports which
had been spread broadcast about her singing; and finally the decree
of Paris (still valid in spite of Paul Poiret’s reported absence
in the trenches) led all our womenfolk into the wearing of Spanish
garments, the hip-hoops of the Velasquez period, the lace flounces
of Goya’s Duchess of Alba, and the mantillas, the combs, and the
_accroche-coeurs_ of Spain, Spain, Spain.... In addition one must
mention Mme. Farrar’s brilliant success, deserved in some degree,
as Carmen, both in Bizet’s opera and in a moving picture drama;
Miss Theda Bara’s film appearance in the same part, made with more
atmospheric suggestion than Mme. Farrar’s, even if less effective as
an interpretation of the moods of the Spanish cigarette girl; Mr.
Charles Chaplin’s eccentric burlesque of the same play; the continued
presence in New York of Andrea de Segurola as an opera and concert
singer; Maria Gay, who gave some performances in _Carmen_ and other
operas; and Lucrezia Bori, although she was unable to sing during the
entire season owing to the unfortunate result of an operation on her
vocal cords; in Chicago, Miss Supervia appeared at the opera and Mme.
Koutznezoff, the Russian, danced Spanish dances; and at the New York
Winter Garden Isabel Rodriguez appeared in Spanish dances which quite
transcended the surroundings and made that stage as atmospheric, for
the few brief moments in which it was occupied by her really entrancing
beauty, as a _maison de danse_ in Seville. The tango, too, in somewhat
modified form, continued to interest “ballroom dancers,” danced to
music provided in many instances by Señor Valverde, an indefatigable
producer of popular tunes, some of which have a certain value as music
owing to their close allegiance to the folk-dances and songs of Spain.
In the art-world there was a noticeable revival of interest in Goya and
El Greco.

But if Mr. Gatti-Casazza, with the best intentions in the world,
should desire to take advantage of any of this _réclame_ by producing
a series of Spanish operas at the Metropolitan Opera House--say four
or five more--he would find himself in difficulty. Where are they?
Several of the operas of Isaac Albeniz have been performed in London,
and in Brussels at the Théâtre de la Monnaie, but would they be liked
here? There is Felipe Pedrell’s monumental work, the trilogy, _Los
Pireneos_, called by Edouard Lopez-Chavarri “the most important work
for the theatre written in Spain”; and there is the aforementioned
_Dolores_. For the rest, one would have to search about among the
zarzuelas; and would the Metropolitan Opera House be a suitable place
for the production of this form of opera? It is doubtful, indeed, if
the zarzuela could take root in any theatre in New York.

The truth is that in Spain Italian and German operas are much more
popular than Spanish, the zarzuela always excepted; and at Señor
Arbós’s series of concerts at the Royal Opera in Madrid one hears
more Bach and Beethoven than Albeniz and Pedrell. There is a growing
interest in music in Spain and there are indications that some day
her composers may again take an important place with the musicians
of other nationalities, a place they proudly held in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries. However, no longer ago than 1894, we
find Louis Lombard writing in his “Observations of a Musician” that
harmony was not taught at the Conservatory of Malaga, and that at
the closing exercises of the Conservatory of Barcelona he had heard
a four-hand arrangement of the _Tannhäuser_ march performed on ten
pianos by forty hands! Havelock Ellis (“The Soul of Spain,” 1909)
affirms that a concert in Spain sets the audience to chattering. They
have a savage love of noise, the Spanish, he says, which incites them
to conversation. Albert Lavignac, in “Music and Musicians” (William
Marchant’s translation), says, “We have left in the shade the Spanish
school, which to say truth does not exist.” But if one reads what
Lavignac has to say about Moussorgsky, one is likely to give little
credence to such extravagant generalities as the one just quoted.
The Moussorgsky paragraph is a gem, and I am only too glad to insert
it here for the sake of those who have not seen it: “A charming and
fruitful melodist, who makes up for a lack of skill in harmonization
by a daring, which is sometimes of doubtful taste; has produced songs,
piano music in small amount, and an opera, _Boris Godunow_.” In the
report of the proceedings of the thirty-fourth session of the London
Musical Association (1907-8) Dr. Thomas Lea Southgate is quoted as
complaining to Sir George Grove because under “Schools of Composition”
in the old edition of Grove’s Dictionary the Spanish School was
dismissed in twenty lines. Sir George, he says, replied, “Well, I gave
it to Rockstro because nobody knows anything about Spanish music.”--The
bibliography of modern Spanish music is indeed indescribably meagre,
although a good deal has been written in and out of Spain about the
early religious composers of the Iberian peninsula.

These matters will be discussed in due course. In the meantime it
has afforded me some amusement to put together a list (which may be
of interest to both the casual reader and the student of music) of
compositions suggested by Spain to composers of other nationalities.
(This list is by no means complete. I have not attempted to include
in it works which are not more or less familiar to the public of the
present day; without boundaries it could easily be extended into a
small volume.) The répertoire of the concert room and the opera house
is streaked through and through with Spanish atmosphere and, on the
whole, I should say, the best Spanish music has not been written by
Spaniards, although most of it, like the best music written in Spain,
is based primarily on the rhythm of folk-tunes, dances and songs. Of
orchestral pieces I think I must put at the head of the list Chabrier’s
rhapsody, _España_, as colourful and rhythmic a combination of tone as
the auditor of a symphony concert is often bidden to hear. It depends
for its melody and rhythm on two Spanish dances, the jota, fast and
fiery, and the malagueña, slow and sensuous. These are true Spanish
tunes; Chabrier, according to report, invented only the rude theme
given to the trombones. The piece was originally written for piano, and
after Chabrier’s death was transformed (with other music by the same
composer) into a ballet, _España_, performed at the Paris Opera, 1911.
Waldteufel based one of his most popular waltzes on the theme of this
rhapsody. Chabrier’s _Habanera_ for the pianoforte (1885) was his last
musical reminiscence of his journey to Spain. It is French composers
generally who have achieved better effects with Spanish atmosphere
than men of other nations, and next to Chabrier’s music I should put
Debussy’s _Iberia_, the second of his _Images_ (1910). It contains
three movements designated respectively as “In the streets and roads,”
“The perfumes of the night,” and “The morning of a fête-day.” It is
indeed rather the smell and the look of Spain than the rhythm that this
music gives us, entirely impressionistic that it is, but rhythm is not
lacking, and such characteristic instruments as castanets, tambourines,
and xylophones are required by the score. “Perfumes of the night” comes
as near to suggesting odours to the nostrils as any music can--and not
all of them are pleasant odours. There is Rimsky-Korsakow’s _Capriccio
Espagnole_, with its _alborado_ or lusty morning serenade, its long
series of cadenzas (as cleverly written as those of _Scheherazade_ to
display the virtuosity of individual players in the orchestra; it is
noteworthy that this work is dedicated to the sixty-seven musicians
of the band at the Imperial Opera House of Petrograd and all of their
names are mentioned on the score) to suggest the vacillating music of
a gipsy encampment, and finally the wild fandango of the Asturias with
which the work comes to a brilliant conclusion. Engelbert Humperdinck
taught the theory of music in the Conservatory of Barcelona for two
years (1885-6), and one of the results was his _Maurische Rhapsodie_ in
three parts (1898-9), still occasionally performed by our orchestras.
Lalo wrote his _Symphonie Espagnole_ for violin and orchestra for the
great Spanish virtuoso, Pablo de Sarasate, but all our violinists
delight to perform it (although usually shorn of a movement or two).
Glinka wrote a _Jota Aragonese_ and _A Night in Madrid_; he gave a
Spanish theme to Balakirew which the latter utilized in his _Overture
on a theme of a Spanish March_. Liszt wrote a _Spanish Rhapsody_ for
pianoforte (arranged as a concert piece for piano and orchestra by
Busoni) in which he used the jota of Aragon as a theme for variations.
Rubinstein’s _Toreador and Andalusian_ and Moszkowski’s _Spanish
Dances_ (for four hands) are known to all amateur pianists as Hugo
Wolf’s _Spanisches Liederbuch_ and Robert Schumann’s _Spanisches
Liederspiel_, set to F. Giebel’s translations of popular Spanish
ballads, are known to all singers. I have heard a song of Saint-Saëns,
_Guitares et Mandolines_, charmingly sung by Greta Torpadie, in which
the instruments of the title, under the subtle fingers of that masterly
accompanist, Coenraad V. Bos, were cleverly imitated. And Debussy’s
_Mandoline_ and Delibes’s _Les Filles de Cadiz_ (which in this country
belongs both to Emma Calvé and Olive Fremstad) spring instantly to
mind. Ravel’s _Rapsodie Espagnole_ is as Spanish as music could be.
The Boston Symphony men have played it during the season just past.
Ravel based the habanera section of his _Rapsodie_ on one of his piano
pieces. But Richard Strauss’s two tone-poems on Spanish subjects, _Don
Juan_ and _Don Quixote_, have not a note of Spanish colouring, so far
as I can remember, from beginning to end. Svendsen’s symphonic poem,
_Zorahayda_, based on a passage in Washington Irving’s “Alhambra,”
is Spanish in theme and may be added to this list together with
Waldteufel’s _Estudiantina_ waltzes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Four modern operas stand out as Spanish in subject and atmosphere. I
would put at the top of the list Zandonai’s _Conchita_; the Italian
composer has caught on his musical palette and transferred to his tonal
canvas a deal of the lazy restless colour of the Iberian peninsula
in this little master-work. The feeling of the streets and patios is
admirably caught. My friend, Pitts Sanborn, said of it, after its
solitary performance at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York by
the Chicago Opera Company, “There is musical atmosphere of a rare
and penetrating kind; there is colour used with the discretion of a
master; there are intoxicating rhythms, and above the orchestra the
voices are heard in a truthful musical speech.... Ever since _Carmen_
it has been so easy to write Spanish music and achieve supremely
the banal. Here there is as little of the Spanish of convention as
in Debussy’s _Iberia_, but there is Spain.” This opera, based on
Pierre Louys’s sadic novel, “La Femme et le Pantin,” owed some of its
extraordinary impression of vitality to the vivid performance given of
the title-rôle by Tarquinia Tarquini. Raoul Laparra, born in Bordeaux,
but who has travelled much in Spain, has written two Spanish operas,
_La Habanera_ and _La Jota_, both named after popular Spanish dances
and both produced at the Opéra-Comique in Paris. I have heard _La
Habanera_ there and found the composer’s use of the dance as a pivot of
a tragedy very convincing. Nor shall I forget the first act-close, in
which a young man, seated on a wall facing the window of a house where
a most bloody murder has been committed, sings a wild Spanish ditty,
accompanying himself on the guitar, crossing and recrossing his legs in
complete abandonment to the rhythm, while in the house rises the wild
treble cry of a frightened child. I have not heard _La Jota_, nor have
I seen the score. I do not find Emile Vuillermoz enthusiastic in his
review (“S. I. M.,” May 15, 1911): “Une danse transforme le premier
acte en un kaléidoscope frénétique et le combat dans l’église doit
donner, au second, dans l’intention de l’auteur ‘une sensation à pic,
un peu comme celle d’un puits où grouillerait la besogne monstreuse
de larves humaines.’ A vrai dire ces deux tableaux de cinématographe
papillotant, corsés de cris, de hurlements et d’un nombre incalculable
de coups de feu constituent pour le spectateur une épreuve physiquement
douloureuse, une hallucination confuse et inquiétante, un cauchemar
assourdissant qui le conduisent irrésistiblement à l’hébétude et à
la migraine. Dans tout cet enfer que devient la musique?” Perhaps
opera-goers in general are not looking for thrills of this order; the
fact remains that _La Jota_ has had a modest career when compared with
_La Habanera_, which has even been performed in Boston. _Carmen_ is
essentially a French opera; the leading emotions of the characters
are expressed in an idiom as French as that of Gounod; yet the dances
and entr’actes are Spanish in colour. The story of Carmen’s entrance
song is worth retelling in Mr. Philip Hale’s words (“Boston Symphony
Orchestra Programme Notes”; 1914-15, P. 287): “Mme. Galli-Marié
disliked her entrance air, which was in 6-8 time with a chorus. She
wished something more audacious, a song in which she could bring into
play the whole battery of her _perversités artistiques_, to borrow
Charles Pigot’s phrase: ‘caressing tones and smiles, voluptuous
inflections, killing glances, disturbing gestures.’ During the
rehearsals Bizet made a dozen versions. The singer was satisfied
only with the thirteenth, the now familiar Habanera, based on an old
Spanish tune that had been used by Sebastian Yradier. This brought
Bizet into trouble, for Yradier’s publisher, Heugel, demanded that the
indebtedness should be acknowledged in Bizet’s score. Yradier made no
complaint, but to avoid a lawsuit or a scandal, Bizet gave consent, and
on the first page of the Habanera in the French edition of _Carmen_
this line is engraved: ‘Imitated from a Spanish song, the property of
the publishers of _Le Ménestrel_.’”

There are other operas the scenes of which are laid in Spain. Some of
them make an attempt at Spanish colouring, more do not. Massenet wrote
no less than five operas on Spanish subjects, _Le Cid_, _Cherubin_,
_Don César de Bazan_, _La Navarraise_ and _Don Quichotte_ (Cervantes’s
novel has frequently lured the composers of lyric dramas with its
story; Clément et Larousse give a long list of _Don Quixote_ operas,
but they do not include one by Manuel Garcia, which is mentioned in
John Towers’s compilation, “Dictionary-Catalogue of Operas.” However,
not a single one of these lyric dramas has held its place on the
stage). The Spanish dances in _Le Cid_ are frequently performed,
although the opera is not. The most famous of the set is called simply
_Aragonaise_; it is not a jota. _Pleurez, mes yeux_, the principal air
of the piece, can scarcely be called Spanish. There is a delightful
suggestion of the jota in _La Navarraise_. In _Don Quichotte_ la belle
Dulcinée sings one of her airs to her own guitar strummings, and much
was made of the fact, before the original production at Monte Carlo,
of Mme. Lucy Arbell’s lessons on that instrument. Mary Garden, who
had learned to dance for _Salome_, took no guitar lessons for _Don
Quichotte_. But is not the guitar an anachronism in this opera? In a
pamphlet by Señor Cecilio de Roda, issued during the celebration of
the tercentenary of the publication of Cervantes’s romance, taking
as its subject the musical references in the work, I find, “The harp
was the aristocratic instrument most favoured by women and it would
appear to be regarded in _Don Quixote_ as the feminine instrument
par excellence.” Was the guitar as we know it in existence at that
epoch? I think the _vihuela_ was the guitar of the period.... Maurice
Ravel wrote a Spanish opera, _L’heure Espagnole_ (one act, performed
at the Paris Opéra-Comique, 1911). Octave Séré (“Musiciens français
d’Aujourd’hui”) says of it: “Les principaux traits de son caractère
et l’influence du sol natal s’y combinent étrangement. De l’alliance
de la mer et du Pays Basque (Ravel was born in the Basses-Pyrénées,
near the sea) est née une musique à la fois fluide et nerveusement
rythmée, mobile, chatoyante, amie du pittoresque et dont le trait
net et précis est plus incisif que profond.” Hugo Wolf’s opera _Der
Corregidor_ is founded on the novel, “Il Sombrero de tres Picos,” of
the Spanish writer, Pedro de Alarcon (1833-91). His unfinished opera
_Manuel Venegas_ also has a Spanish subject, suggested by Alarcon’s
“El Nino de la Bola.” Other Spanish operas are Beethoven’s _Fidelio_,
Balfe’s _The Rose of Castille_, Verdi’s _Ernani_ and _Il Trovatore_,
Rossini’s _Il Barbiere di Siviglia_, Mozart’s _Don Giovanni_ and _Le
Nozze di Figaro_, Weber’s _Preciosa_ (really a play with incidental
music), Dargomijsky’s _The Stone Guest_ (Pushkin’s version of the Don
Juan story. This opera, by the way, was one of the many retouched and
completed by Rimsky-Korsakow), Reznicek’s _Donna Diana_--and Wagner’s
_Parsifal_! The American composer John Knowles Paine’s opera _Azara_,
dealing with a Moorish subject, has, I think, never been performed.


II

The early religious composers of Spain deserve a niche all to
themselves, be it ever so tiny, as in the present instance. There is,
to be sure, some doubt as to whether their inspiration was entirely
peninsular, or whether some of it was wafted from Flanders, and the
rest gleaned in Rome, for in their service to the church most of them
migrated to Italy and did their best work there. It is not the purpose
of the present chronicler to devote much space to these early men,
or to discuss in detail their music. There are no books in English
devoted to a study of Spanish music, and few in any language, but
what few exist take good care to relate at considerable length (some
of them with frequent musical quotation) the state of music in Spain
in the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries, the golden
period. To the reader who may wish to pursue this phase of our subject
I offer a small bibliography. There is first of all A. Soubies’s two
volumes, “Histoire de la Musique d’Espagne,” published in 1889. The
second volume takes us through the eighteenth century. The religious
and early secular composers are catalogued in these volumes, but there
is little attempt at detail, and he is a happy composer who is awarded
an entire page. Soubies does not find occasion to pause for more than a
paragraph on most of his subjects. Occasionally, however, he lightens
the plodding progress of the reader, as when he quotes Father Bermudo’s
“Declaracion de Instrumentos” (1548; the 1555 edition is in the Library
of Congress at Washington): “There are three kinds of instruments in
music. The first are called natural; these are men, of whom the song
is called _musical harmony_. Others are artificial and are played
by the touch--such as the harp, the _vihuela_ (the ancient guitar,
which resembles the lute), and others like them; the music of these
is called _artificial_ or rhythmic. The third species is pneumatique
and includes instruments such as the flute, the douçaine (a species of
oboe), and the organ.” There may be some to dispute this ingenious and
highly original classification. The best known, and perhaps the most
useful (because it is easily accessible) history of Spanish music is
that written by Mariano Soriano Fuertes, in four volumes: “Historia
de la Música Española desde la venida de los Fenicios hasta el año de
1850”; published in Barcelona and Madrid in 1855. There is further the
“Diccionario Tecnico, Historico, y Biografico de la Música,” by Jose
Parada y Barreto (Madrid, 1867). This, of course, is a general work on
music, but Spain gets her full due. For example, a page and a half is
devoted to Beethoven, and nine pages to Eslava. It is to this latter
composer to whom we must turn for the most complete and important
work on Spanish church music: “Lira Sacro-Hispana” (Madrid, 1869),
in ten volumes, with voluminous extracts from the composers’ works.
This collection of Spanish church music from the sixteenth century
through the eighteenth, with biographical notices of the composers is
out of print and rare (there is a copy in the Congressional Library
at Washington). As a complement to it I may mention Felipe Pedrell’s
“Hispaniae Schola Música Sacra,” begun in 1894, which has already
reached the proportions of Eslava’s work. Pedrell, who was the master
of Enrique Granados, has also issued a fine edition of the music of
Victoria.

The Spanish composers had their full share in the process of
crystallizing music into forms of permanent beauty during the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Rockstro asserts that during the
early part of the sixteenth century nearly all the best composers for
the great Roman choirs were Spaniards. But their greatest achievement
was the foundation of the school of which Palestrina was the crown. On
the music of their own country their influence is less perceptible. I
think the name of Cristofero Morales (1512-53) is the first important
name in the history of Spanish music. He preceded Palestrina in Rome
and some of his masses and motets are still sung in the Papal chapel
there (and in other Roman Catholic edifices and by choral societies).
Francesco Guerrero (1528-99; these dates are approximate) was a pupil
of Morales. He wrote settings of the Passion choruses according to
St. Matthew and St. John and numerous masses and motets. Tomas Luis
de Victoria is, of course, the greatest figure in Spanish music, and
next to Palestrina (with whom he worked contemporaneously) the greatest
figure in sixteenth century music. Soubies writes: “One might say that
on his musical palette he has entirely at his disposition, in some
sort, the glowing colour of Zurbaran, the realistic and transparent
tones of Velasquez, the ideal shades of Juan de Juarez and Murillo. His
mysticism is that of Santa Theresa and San Juan de la Cruz.” The music
of Victoria is still very much alive and may be heard even in New York,
occasionally, through the medium of the Musical Art Society. Whether
it is performed in churches in America or not I do not know; the Roman
choirs still sing it....

The list might be extended indefinitely ... but the great names I
have given. There are Cabezon, whom Pedrell calls the “Spanish Bach,”
Navarro, Caseda, Comes, Ribera, Castillo, Lobo, Duron, Romero, Juarez.
On the whole I think these composers had more influence on Rome--the
Spanish nature is more reverent than the Italian--than on Spain. The
modern Spanish composers have learned more from the folk-song and dance
than they have from the church composers. However, there are voices
which dissent from this opinion. G. Tebaldini (“Rivista Musicale,” Vol.
IV, Pp. 267 and 494) says that Pedrell in his studies learned much
which he turned to account in the choral writing of his operas. And
Felipe Pedrell himself asserts that there is an unbroken chain between
the religious composers of the sixteenth century and the theatrical
composers of the seventeenth. We may follow him thus far without
believing that the theatrical composers of the seventeenth century had
too great an influence on the secular composers of the present day.


III

All the world dances in Spain, at least it would seem so, in reading
over the books of the Marco Polos who have made voyages of discovery
on the Iberian peninsula. Guitars seem to be as common there as
pea-shooters in New England, and strumming seems to set the feet
a-tapping and voices a-singing, what, they care not. (Havelock Ellis
says: “It is not always agreeable to the Spaniard to find that dancing
is regarded by the foreigner as a peculiar and important Spanish
institution. Even Valera, with his wide culture, could not escape
this feeling; in a review of a book about Spain by an American author
entitled ‘The Land of the Castanet’--a book which he recognized as full
of appreciation for Spain--Valera resented the title. It is, he says,
as though a book about the United States should be called ‘The Land of
Bacon.’”) Oriental colour is streaked through and through the melodies
and harmonies, many of which betray their Arabian origin; others are
_flamenco_, or gipsy. The dances, almost invariably accompanied by
song, are generally in 3-4 time or its variants such as 6-8 or 3-8;
the tango, of course, is in 2-4. But the dancers evolve the most
elaborate inter-rhythms out of these simple measures, creating thereby
a complexity of effect which defies any comprehensible notation on
paper. As it is on this _fioriture_, if I may be permitted to use the
word in this connection, of the dancer that the sophisticated composer
bases some of his most natural and national effects, I shall linger on
the subject. La Argentina has re-arranged many of the Spanish dances
for purposes of the concert stage, but in her translation she has
retained in a large measure this interesting complication of rhythm,
marking the irregularity of the beat, now with a singularly complicated
detonation of heel-tapping, now with a sudden bend of a knee, now with
the subtle quiver of an eyelash, now with a shower of castanet sparks
(an instrument which requires a hard tutelage for its complete mastery;
Richard Ford tells us that even the children in the streets of Spain
rap shells together, to become self-taught artists in the use of it).
Chabrier, in his visit to Spain with his wife in 1882, attempted to
note down some of these rhythmic variations achieved by the dancers
while the musicians strummed their guitars, and he was partially
successful. But all in all he only succeeded in giving in a single
measure each variation; he did not attempt to weave them into the
intricate pattern which the Spanish women contrive to make of them.

There is a singular similarity to be observed between this heel-tapping
and the complicated drum-tapping of the African negroes of certain
tribes. In his book “Afro-American Folksongs” H. E. Krehbiel thus
describes the musical accompaniment of the dances in the Dahoman
Village at the World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago: “These dances
were accompanied by choral song and the rhythmical and harmonious
beating of drums and bells, the song being in unison. The harmony was
a tonic major triad broken up rhythmically in a most intricate and
amazingly ingenious manner. The instruments were tuned with excellent
justness. The fundamental tone came from a drum made of a hollowed log
about three feet long with a single head, played by one who seemed
to be the leader of the band, though there was no giving of signals.
This drum was beaten with the palms of the hands. A variety of smaller
drums, some with one, some with two heads, were beaten variously with
sticks and fingers. The bells, four in number, were of iron and were
held mouth upward and struck with sticks. The players showed the most
remarkable rhythmical sense and skill that ever came under my notice.
Berlioz in his supremest effort with his army of drummers produced
nothing to compare in artistic interest with the harmonious drumming
of these savages. The fundamental effect was a combination of double
and triple time, the former kept by the singers, the latter by the
drummers, but it is impossible to convey the idea of the wealth of
detail achieved by the drummers by means of exchange of the rhythms,
syncopation of both simultaneously, and dynamic devices. Only by
making a score of the music could this have been done. I attempted to
make such a score by enlisting the help of the late John C. Filmore,
experienced in Indian music, but we were thwarted by the players
who, evidently divining our purpose when we took out our notebooks,
mischievously changed their manner of playing as soon as we touched
pencil to paper.”

The resemblance between negro and Spanish music is very noticeable. Mr.
Krehbiel says that in South America Spanish melody has been imposed
on negro rhythm. In the dances of the people of Spain, as Chabrier
points out, the melody is often practically nil; the effect is rhythmic
(an effect which is emphasized by the obvious harmonic and melodic
limitations of the guitar, which invariably accompanies all singers
and dancers). If there were a melody or if the guitarists played well
(which they usually do not) one could not distinguish its contours
what with the cries of Olè! and the heel-beats of the performers.
Spanish melodies, indeed, are often scraps of tunes, like the African
negro melodies. The habanera is a true African dance, taken to Spain
by way of Cuba, as Albert Friedenthal points out in his book, “Musik,
Tanz, und Dichtung bei den Kreolen Amerikas.” Whoever was responsible,
Arab, negro, or Moor (Havelock Ellis says that the dances of Spain
are closely allied with the ancient dances of Greece and Egypt), the
Spanish dances betray their oriental origin in their complexity of
rhythm (a complexity not at all obvious on the printed page, as so
much of it depends on dancer, guitarist, singer, and even public!),
and the _fioriture_ which decorate their melody when melody occurs.
While Spanish religious music is perhaps not distinctively Spanish, the
dances invariably display marked national characteristics; it is on
these, then (some in greater, some in less degree), that the composers
in and out of Spain have built their most atmospheric inspirations,
their best pictures of popular life in the Iberian peninsula. A good
deal of the interest of this music is due to the important part the
guitar plays in its construction; the modulations are often contrary
to all rules of harmony and (yet, some would say) the music seems
to be effervescent with variety and fire. Of the guitarists Richard
Ford (“Gatherings from Spain”) says: “The performers seldom are very
scientific musicians; they content themselves with striking the
chords, sweeping the whole hand over the strings, or flourishing,
and tapping the board with the thumb, at which they are very expert.
Occasionally in the towns there is some one who has attained more
power over this ungrateful instrument; but the attempt is a failure.
The guitar responds coldly to Italian words and elaborate melody,
which never come home to Spanish ears or hearts.” (An exception must
be made in the case of Miguel Llobet. I first heard him play at Pitts
Sanborn’s concert at the Punch and Judy Theatre (April 17, 1916) for
the benefit of Hospital 28 in Bourges, France, and he made a deep
impression on me. In one of his numbers, the _Spanish Fantasy_ of
Tárrega, he astounded and thrilled me. He seemed at all times to exceed
the capacity of his instrument, obtaining a variety of colour which
was truly amazing. In this particular number he not only plucked the
keyboard but the fingerboard as well, in intricate and rapid _tempo_;
seemingly two different kinds of instruments were playing. But at all
times he variated his tone; sometimes he made the instrument sound
almost as though it had been played by wind and not plucked. Especially
did I note a suggestion of the bagpipe. A true artist. None of the
music, the fantasy mentioned, a serenade of Albeniz, and a Menuet of
Tor, was particularly interesting, although the Fantasia contained
some fascinating references to folk-dance tunes. There is nothing
sensational about Llobet, a quiet prim sort of man; he sits quietly in
his chair and makes music. It might be a harp or a ’cello--no striving
for personal effect.)

The Spanish dances are infinite in number and for centuries back
they seem to form part and parcel of Spanish life. Discussion as to
how they are danced is a feature of the descriptions. No two authors
agree, it would seem; to a mere annotator the fact is evident that
they are danced differently on different occasions. It is obvious that
they are danced differently in different provinces. The Spaniards, as
Richard Ford points out, are not too willing to give information to
strangers, frequently because they themselves lack the knowledge. Their
statements are often misleading, sometimes intentionally so. They
do not understand the historical temperament. Until recently many of
the art treasures and archives of the peninsula were but poorly kept.
Those who lived in the shadow of the Alhambra admired only its shade.
It may be imagined that there has been even less interest displayed in
recording the folk-dances. “Dancing in Spain is now a matter which few
know anything about,” writes Havelock Ellis, “because every one takes
it for granted that he knows all about it; and any question on the
subject receives a very ready answer which is usually of questionable
correctness.” Of the music of the dances we have many records, and that
they are generally in 3-4 time or its variants we may be certain. As
to whether they are danced by two women, a woman and a man, or a woman
alone, the authorities do not always agree. The confusion is added to
by the oracular attitude of the scribes. It seems quite certain to me
that this procedure varies. That the animated picture almost invariably
possesses great fascination there are only too many witnesses to prove.
I myself can testify to the marvel of some of them, set to be sure in
strange frames, the Feria in Paris, for example; but even without the
surroundings, which Spanish dances demand, the diablerie, the shivering
intensity of these fleshly women, always wound tight with such
shawls as only the mistresses of kings might wear in other countries,
have drawn taut the _real thrill_. It is dancing which enlists the
co-operation not only of the feet and legs, but of the arms and, in
fact, the entire body.

The smart world in Spain to-day dances much as the smart world does
anywhere else, although it does not, I am told, hold a brief for our
tango, which Mr. Krehbiel suggests is a corruption of the original
African habanera. But in older days many of the dances, such as the
pavana, the sarabande, and the gallarda, were danced at the court and
were in favour with the nobility. (Although presumably of Italian
origin, the pavana and gallarda were more popular in Spain than in
Rome. Fuertes says that the sarabande was invented in the middle of
the sixteenth century by a dancer called Zarabanda who was a native of
either Seville or Guayaquil.) The pavana, an ancient dance of grave and
stately measure, was much in vogue in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. An explanation of its name is that the figures executed
by the dancers bore a resemblance to the semi-circular wheel-like
spreading of the tail of a peacock. The gallarda (French, gaillard) was
usually danced as a relief to the pavana (and indeed often follows it
in the dance-suites of the classical composers in which these forms all
figure). The jacara, or more properly xacara, of the sixteenth century,
was danced in accompaniment to a romantic, swashbuckling ditty. The
Spanish folias were a set of dances danced to a simple tune treated
in a variety of styles with very free accompaniment of castanets
and bursts of song. Corelli in Rome in 1700 published twenty-four
variations in this form, which have been played in our day by Fritz
Kreisler and other violinists.

The names of the modern Spanish dances are often confused in the
descriptions offered by observing travellers, for the reasons already
noted. Hundreds of these descriptions exist, and it is difficult to
choose the most telling of them. Gertrude Stein, who has spent the last
two years in Spain, has noted the rhythm of several of these dances
by the mingling of her original use of words with the ingratiating
medium of _vers libre_. She has succeeded, I think, better than some
musicians in suggesting the intricacies of the rhythm. I should like to
transcribe one of these attempts here, but that I have not the right to
do as I have only seen them in manuscript; they have not yet appeared
in print. These pieces are in a sense the thing itself--I shall have
to fall back on descriptions of the thing. The tirana, a dance common
to the province of Andalusia, is accompanied by song. It has a decided
rhythm, affording opportunities for grace and gesture, the women toying
with their aprons, the men flourishing hats and handkerchiefs. The
polo, or olè, is now a gipsy dance. Mr. Ellis asserts that it is a
corruption of the sarabande! He goes on to say, “The so-called gipsy
dances of Spain are Spanish dances which the Spaniards are tending to
relinquish but which the gipsies have taken up with energy and skill.”
(This theory might be warmly contested.) The bolero, a comparatively
modern dance, came to Spain through Italy. Mr. Philip Hale points out
the fact that the bolero and the cachucha (which, by the way, one
seldom hears of nowadays) were the popular Spanish dances when Mesdames
Faviani and Dolores Tesrai, and their followers, Mlle. Noblet and Fanny
Elssler, visited Paris. Fanny Elssler indeed is most frequently seen
pictured in Spanish costume, and the cachucha was danced by her as
often, I fancy, as Mme. Pavlowa dances _Le Cygne_ of Saint-Saëns. Anna
de Camargo, who acquired great fame as a dancer in France in the early
eighteenth century, was born in Brussels but was of Spanish descent.
She relied, however, on the Italian classic style for her success
rather than on national Spanish dances. The seguidilla is a gipsy
dance which has the same rhythm as the bolero but is more animated and
stirring. Examples of these dances, and of the jota, fandango, and
the sevillana, are to be met with in the compositions listed in the
first section of this article, in the appendices of Soriano Fuertes’s
“History of Spanish Music,” in Grove’s Dictionary, in the numbers of
“S. I. M.” in which the letters of Emmanuel Chabrier occur, and in
collections made by P. Lacome, published in Paris.

The jota is another dance in 3-4 time. Every province in Spain has its
own jota, but the most famous variations are those of Aragon, Valencia,
and Navarre. It is accompanied by the guitar, the _bandarria_ (similar
to the guitar), small drum, castanets, and triangle. Mr. Hale says
that its origin in the twelfth century is attributed to a Moor named
Alben Jot who fled from Valencia to Aragon. “The jota,” he continues,
“is danced not only at merrymakings but at certain religious festivals
and even in watching the dead. One called the ‘Natividad del Señor’
(nativity of our Lord) is danced on Christmas eve in Aragon, and is
accompanied by songs, and jotas are sung and danced at the crossroads,
invoking the favour of the Virgin, when the festival of Our Lady del
Pilar is celebrated at Saragossa.”

Havelock Ellis’s description of the jota is worth reproducing:
“The Aragonaise jota, the most important and typical dance outside
Andalusia, is danced by a man and a woman, and is a kind of combat
between them; most of the time they are facing each other, both using
castanets and advancing and retreating in an apparently aggressive
manner, the arms alternately slightly raised and lowered, and the legs,
with a seeming attempt to trip the partner, kicking out alternately
somewhat sidewise, as the body is rapidly supported first on one side
and then on the other. It is a monotonous dance, with immense rapidity
and vivacity in its monotony, but it has not the deliberate grace and
fascination, the happy audacities of Andalusian dancing. There is,
indeed, no faintest suggestion of voluptuousness in it, but it may
rather be said, in the words of a modern poet, Salvador Rueda, to have
in it ‘the sound of helmets and plumes and lances and banners, the
roaring of cannon, the neighing of horses, the shock of swords.’”

Chabrier, in his astounding and amusing letters from Spain, gives us
vivid pictures and interesting information. This one, written to his
friend, Edouard Moullé, from Granada, November 4, 1882, appeared in “S.
I. M.” April 15, 1911 (I have omitted the musical illustrations, which,
however, possess great value for the student): “In a month I must leave
adorable Spain ... and say good-bye to the Spaniards,--because, I say
this only to you, they are very nice, the little girls! I have not seen
a really ugly woman since I have been in Andalusia: I do not speak of
the feet, they are so small that I have never seen them; the hands are
tiny and well-kept and the arms of an exquisite contour; I speak only
of what one can see, but they show a good deal; add the arabesques, the
side-curls, and other ingenuities of the coiffure, the inevitable fan,
the flower and the comb in the hair, placed well behind, the shawl of
Chinese crêpe, with long fringe and embroidered in flowers, knotted
around the figure, the arm bare, and the eye protected by eyelashes
which are long enough to curl; the skin of dull white or orange colour,
according to the race, all this smiling, gesticulating, dancing,
drinking, and careless to the last degree....

“That is the Andalusian.

“Every evening we go with Alice to the café-concerts where the
malagueñas, the Soledas, the Sapateados, and the Peteneras are sung;
then the dances, absolutely Arab, to speak truth; if you could see
them wriggle, unjoint their hips, contortion, I believe you would not
try to get away!... At Malaga the dancing became so intense that I
was compelled to take my wife away; it wasn’t even amusing any more.
I can’t write about it, but I remember it and I will describe it to
you.--I have no need to tell you that I have noted down many things;
the tango, a kind of dance in which the women imitate the pitching of
a ship (_le tangage du navire_) is the only dance in 2 time; all the
others, all, are in 3-4 (Seville) or in 3-8 (Malaga and Cadiz);--in
the North it is different, there is some music in 5-8, very curious.
The 2-4 of the tango is always like the habanera; this is the picture:
one or two women dance, two silly men play it doesn’t matter what on
their guitars, and five or six women howl, with excruciating voices
and in triplet figures impossible to note down because they change
the air--every instant a new scrap of tune. They howl a series of
figurations with syllables, words, rising voices, clapping hands which
strike the six quavers, emphasizing the third and the sixth, cries of
Anda! Anda! La Salud! eso es la Maraquita! gracia, nationidad! Baila,
la chiquilla! Anda! Anda! Consuelo! Olè, la Lola, olè la Carmen! que
gracia! que elegancia! all that to excite the young dancer. It is
vertiginous--it is unspeakable!

“The Sevillana is another thing: it is in 3-4 time (and with
castanets).... All this becomes extraordinarily alluring with two
curls, a pair of castanets and a guitar. It is impossible to write down
the malagueña. It is a melopœia, however, which has a form and which
always ends on the dominant, to which the guitar furnishes 3-8 time,
and the spectator (when there is one) seated beside the guitarist,
holds a cane between his legs and beats the syncopated rhythm; the
dancers themselves instinctively syncopate the measures in a thousand
ways, striking with their heels an unbelievable number of rhythms....
It is all rhythm and dance: the airs scraped out by the guitarist
have no value; besides, they cannot be heard on account of the cries
of Anda! la chiquilla! que gracia! que elegancia! Anda! Olè! Olè! la
chiquirritita! and the more the cries the more the dancer laughs with
her mouth wide open, and turns her hips, and is mad with her body....”

As it is on these dances that composers invariably base their Spanish
music (not alone Albeniz, Chapí, Bretón, and Granados, but Chabrier,
Ravel, Laparra, and Bizet, as well) we may linger somewhat longer on
their delights. The following compelling description is from Richard
Ford’s highly readable “Gatherings from Spain”: “The dance which is
closely analogous to the _Ghowasee_ of the Egyptians, and the _Nautch_
of the Hindoos, is called the _Olè_ by Spaniards, the _Romalis_ by
their gipsies; the soul and essence of it consists in the expression of
a certain sentiment, one not indeed of a very sentimental or correct
character. The ladies, who seem to have no bones, resolve the problem
of perpetual motion, their feet having comparatively a sinecure, as the
whole person performs a pantomime, and trembles like an aspen leaf; the
flexible form and Terpsichore figure of a young Andalusian girl--be she
gipsy or not--is said, by the learned, to have been designed by nature
as the fit frame for her voluptuous imagination.

“Be that as it may, the scholar and classical commentator will every
moment quote Martial, etc., when he beholds the unchanged balancing of
hands, raised as if to catch showers of roses, the tapping of the feet,
and the serpentine quivering movements. A contagious excitement seizes
the spectators, who, like Orientals, beat time with their hands in
measured cadence, and at every pause applaud with cries and clappings.
The damsels, thus encouraged, continue in violent action until nature
is all but exhausted; then aniseed brandy, wine, and _alpisteras_ are
handed about, and the fête, carried on to early dawn, often concludes
in broken heads, which here are called ‘gipsy’s fare.’ These dances
appear, to a stranger from the chilly north, to be more marked by
energy than by grace, nor have the legs less to do than the body, hips,
and arms. The sight of this unchanged pastime of antiquity, which
excites the Spaniard to frenzy, rather disgusts an English spectator,
possibly from some national malorganization, for, as Molière says,
‘l’Angleterre a produit des grands hommes dans les sciences et les
beaux arts, mais pas un grand danseur--allez lire l’histoire.’” (A fact
as true in our day as it was in Molière’s.)

On certain days the sevillana is danced before the high altar of
the cathedral at Seville. The Reverend Henry Cart de Lafontaine
(“Proceedings of the Musical Association”; London, thirty-third
session, 1906-7) gives the following account of it, quoting a “French
author”: “While Louis XIII was reigning over France, the Pope heard
much talk of the Spanish dance called the ‘Sevillana.’ He wished to
satisfy himself, by actual eye-witness, as to the character of this
dance, and expressed his wish to a bishop of the diocese of Seville,
who every year visited Rome. Evil tongues make the bishop responsible
for the primary suggestion of the idea. Be that as it may, the bishop,
on his return to Seville, had twelve youths well instructed in all
the intricate measures of this Andalusian dance. He had to choose
youths, for how could he present maidens to the horrified glance of
the Holy Father? When his little troop was thoroughly schooled and
perfected, he took the party to Rome, and the audience was arranged.
The ‘Sevillana’ was danced in one of the rooms of the Vatican. The Pope
warmly complimented the young executants, who were dressed in beautiful
silk costumes of the period. The bishop humbly asked for permission to
perform this dance at certain fêtes in the cathedral church at Seville,
and further pleaded for a restriction of this privilege to that church
alone. The Pope, hoist by his own petard, did not like to refuse, but
granted the privilege with this restriction, that it should only last
so long as the costumes of the dancers were wearable. Needless to say,
these costumes are, therefore, objects of constant repair, but they are
supposed to retain their identity even to this day. And this is the
reason why the twelve boys who dance the ‘Sevillana’ before the high
altar in the cathedral on certain feast days are dressed in the costume
belonging to the reign of Louis XIII.”

This is a very pretty story, but it is not uncontradicted.... Has any
statement been made about Spanish dancing or music which has been
allowed to go uncontradicted? Look upon that picture and upon this: “As
far as it is possible to ascertain from records,” says Rhoda G. Edwards
in the “Musical Standard,” “this dance would seem always to have been
in use in Seville cathedral; when the town was taken from the Moors in
the thirteenth century it was undoubtedly an established custom and in
1428 we find the six boys recognized as an integral part of the chapter
by Pope Eugenius IV. The dance is known as the (_sic_) ‘Los Scises,’
or dance of the six boys who, with four others, dance it before the
high altar at Benediction on the three evenings before Lent and in
the octaves of Corpus Christi and La Purissima (the conception of Our
Lady). The dress of the boys is most picturesque, page costumes of the
time of Philip III being worn, blue for La Purissima and red satin
doublets slashed with blue for the other occasion; white hats with blue
and white feathers are also worn whilst dancing. The dance is usually
of twenty-five minutes’ duration and in form seems quite unique, not
resembling any of the other Spanish dance-forms, or in fact those of
any other country. The boys accompany the symphony on castanets and
sing a hymn in two parts whilst dancing.”

From another author we learn that religious dancing is to be seen
elsewhere in Spain than at Seville cathedral. At one time, it is said
to have been common. The pilgrims to the shrine of the Virgin at
Montserrat were wont to dance, and dancing took place in the churches
of Valencia, Toledo, and Jurez. Religious dancing continued to be
common, especially in Catalonia up to the seventeenth century. An
account of the dance in the Seville cathedral may be found in “Los
Españoles Pintados por si Mismos” (pages 287-91).

This very incomplete and rambling record of Spanish dancing should
include some mention of the fandango. The origin of the word is
obscure, but the dance is obviously one of the gayest and wildest of
the Spanish dances. Like the malagueña it is in 3-8 time, but it is
quite different in spirit from that sensuous form of terpsichorean
enjoyment. La Argentina informs me that “fandango” in Spanish suggests
very much what “bachanale” does in English or French. It is a very old
dance, and may be a survival of a Moorish dance, as Desrat suggests.
Mr. Philip Hale found the following account of it somewhere:

“Like an electric shock, the notes of the fandango animate all hearts.
Men and women, young and old, acknowledge the power of this air over
the ears and soul of every Spaniard. The young men spring to their
places, rattling castanets, or imitating their sound by snapping their
fingers. The girls are remarkable for the willowy languor and lightness
of their movements, the voluptuousness of their attitudes--beating the
exactest time with tapping heels. Partners tease and entreat and pursue
each other by turns. Suddenly the music stops, and each dancer shows
his skill by remaining absolutely motionless, bounding again in the
full life of the fandango as the orchestra strikes up. The sound of the
guitar, the violin, the rapid tic-tac of heels (_taconeos_), the crack
of fingers and castanets, the supple swaying of the dancers, fill the
spectators with ecstasy.

“The music whirls along in a rapid triple time. Spangles glitter; the
sharp clank of ivory and ebony castanets beats out the cadence of
strange, throbbing, deafening notes--assonances unknown to music,
but curiously characteristic, effective, and intoxicating. Amidst the
rustle of silks, smiles gleam over white teeth, dark eyes sparkle and
droop, and flash up again in flame. All is flutter and glitter, grace
and animation--quivering, sonorous, passionate, seductive. _Olè! Olè!_
Faces beam and burn. _Olè! Olè!_

“The bolero intoxicates, the fandango inflames.”

It can be well understood that the study of Spanish dancing and its
music must be carried on in Spain. Mr. Ellis tells us why: “Another
characteristic of Spanish dancing, and especially of the most typical
kind called flamenco, lies in its accompaniments, and particularly
in the fact that under proper conditions all the spectators are
themselves performers.... Thus it is that at the end of a dance an
absolute silence often falls, with no sound of applause: the relation
of performers and public has ceased to exist.... The finest Spanish
dancing is at once killed or degraded by the presence of an indifferent
or unsympathetic public, and that is probably why it cannot be
transplanted, but remains local.”

At the end of a dance an absolute silence often falls.... I am again
in an underground café in Amsterdam. It is the eve of the Queen’s
birthday, and the Dutch are celebrating. The low, smoke-wreathed room
is crowded with students, soldiers, and women. Now a weazened female
takes her place at the piano, on a slightly raised platform at one side
of the room. She begins to play. The dancing begins. It is not woman
with man; the dancing is informal. Some dance together, and some dance
alone; some sing the melody of the tune, others shriek, but all make
a noise. Faster and faster and louder and louder the music is pounded
out, and the dancing becomes wilder and wilder. A tray of glasses is
kicked from the upturned palm of a sweaty waiter. Waiter, broken glass,
dancer, all lie, a laughing heap, on the floor. A soldier and a woman
stand in opposite corners, facing the corners; then without turning,
they back towards the middle of the room at a furious pace; the
collision is appalling. Hand in hand the mad dancers encircle the room,
throwing confetti, beer, anything. A heavy stein crushes two teeth--the
wound bleeds--but the dancer does not stop. Noise and action and colour
all become synonymous. There is no escape from the force. I am dragged
into the circle. Suddenly the music stops. All the dancers stop. The
soldier no longer looks at the woman by his side; not a word is spoken.
People lumber towards chairs. The woman looks for a glass of water
to assuage the pain of her bleeding mouth. I think Jaques-Dalcroze is
right when he seeks to unite spectator and actor, drama and public.


IV

In the preceding section I may have too strongly insisted upon the
relation of the folk-song to the dance. It is true that the two are
seldom separated in performance (although not all songs are danced;
for example, the _cañas_ and _playeras_ of Andalusia). However, most
of the folk-songs of Spain are intended to be danced; they are built
on dance rhythms and they bear the names of dances. Thus the jota is
always danced to the same music, although the variations are great at
different times and in different provinces. It is, of course, when
the folk-songs are danced that they make their best effect, in the
polyrhythm achieved by the opposing rhythms of guitar-player, dancer,
and singer. When there is no dancer the defect is sometimes overcome by
some one tapping a stick on the ground in imitation of resounding heels.

Blind beggars have a habit of singing the songs, in certain provinces,
with a wealth of florid ornament, such ornament as is always
associated with oriental airs in performance, and this ornament still
plays a considerable rôle when the vocalist becomes an integral part
of the accompaniment for a dancer. Chabrier gives several examples of
it in one of his letters. In the circumstances it can readily be seen
that Spanish folk-songs written down are pretty bare recollections of
the real thing, and when sung by singers who have no knowledge of the
traditional manner of performing them they are likely to sound fairly
banal. The same thing might be said of the negro folk-songs of America,
or the folk-songs of Russia or Hungary, but with much less truth, for
the folk-songs of these countries usually possess a melodic interest
which is seldom inherent in the folk-songs of Spain. To make their
effect they must be performed by Spaniards, as nearly as possible after
the manner of the people. Indeed, their spirit and their polyrhythmic
effects are much more essential to their proper interpretation than
their melody, as many witnesses have pointed out.

Spanish music, indeed, much of it, is actually unpleasant to Western
ears; it lacks the sad monotony and the wailing intensity of true
oriental music; much of it is loud and blaring, like the hot sunglare
of the Iberian peninsula. However, many a Western or Northern European
has found pleasure in listening by the hour to the strains, which often
sound as if they were improvised, sung by some beggar or mountaineer.

The collections of these songs are not in any sense complete and few of
them attempt more than a collocation of the songs of one locality or
people. Deductions have been drawn. For example it is noted that the
Basque songs are irregular in melody and rhythm and are further marked
by unusual tempos, 5-8, or 7-4. In Aragon and Navarre the popular song
(and dance) is the jota; in Galicia, the seguidilla; the Catalonian
songs resemble the folk-tunes of Southern France. The Andalusian songs,
like the dances of that province, are the most beautiful of all, often
truly oriental in their rhythm and floridity. In Spain the gipsy has
become an integral part of the popular life, and it is difficult at
times to determine what is _flamenco_ and what is Spanish. However,
collections (few to be sure) have been attempted of gipsy songs.

Elsewhere in this rambling article I have touched on the _villancicos_
and the early song-writers. To do justice to these subjects would
require a good deal more space and a different intention. Those who
are interested in them may pursue these matters in Pedrell’s various
works. The most available collection of Spanish folk-tunes is that
issued by P. Lacome and J. Puig y Alsubide (Paris, 1872). There are
several collections of Basque songs; Demofilo’s “Coleccion de Cantos
Flamencos” (Seville, 1881), Cecilio Ocon’s collection of Andalusian
folk-songs, and F. Rodriguez Marin’s “Cantos Populares Españoles”
(Seville, 1882-3) may also be mentioned.


V

After the bullfight the most popular form of amusement in Spain is
the zarzuela, the only distinctive art-form which Spanish music has
evolved, but there has been no progress; the form has not changed,
except perhaps to degenerate, since its invention in the early
seventeenth century. Soriano Fuertes and other writers have devoted
pages to grieving because Spanish composers have not taken occasion to
make something grander and more important out of the zarzuela. The fact
remains that they have not, although, small and great alike, they have
all taken a hand at writing these entertainments. But as they found
the zarzuela, so they have left it. It must be conceded that the form
is quite distinct from that of opera and should not be confused with
it. And the Spaniards are probably right when they assert that the
zarzuela is the mother of the French opéra-bouffe. At least it must be
admitted that Offenbach and Lecocq and their precursors owe something
of the germ of their inspiration to the Spanish form. To-day the melody
chests of the zarzuela markets are plundered to find tunes for French
_revues_, and such popular airs as _La Paraguaya_ and _Y ... Como le
Vá?_ were originally danced and sung in Spanish theatres. The composer
of these airs, J. Valverde _fils_, indeed found the French market so
good that he migrated to Paris, and for some time has been writing
_musique mélangée ... une moitié de chaque nation_. So _La Rose de
Grenade_, composed for Paris, might have been written for Spain, with
slight melodic alterations and tauromachian allusions in the book.

The zarzuela is usually a one act piece (although sometimes it is
permitted to run into two or more acts) in which the music is freely
interrupted by spoken dialogue, and that in turn gives way to national
dances. Very often the entire score is danced as well as sung. The
subject is usually comic and often topical, although it may be serious,
poetic, or even tragic. The actors often introduce dialogue of
their own, “gagging” freely; sometimes they engage in long impromptu
conversations with members of the audience. They also embroider on the
music after the fashion of the great singers of the old Italian opera
(Dr. de Lafontaine asserts that Spanish audiences, even in cabarets,
demand embroidery of this sort). The music is spirited and lively,
and in the dances, Andalusian, _flamenco_, or Sevillan, as the case
may be, it attains its best results. H. V. Hamilton, in his essay on
the subject in Grove’s Dictionary, says, “The music is ... apt to be
vague in form when the national dance and folk-song forms are avoided.
The orchestration is a little blatant.” It will be seen that this
description suits Granados’s _Goyescas_ (the opera), which is on its
safest ground during the dances and becomes excessively vague at other
times; but _Goyescas_ is not a zarzuela, because there is no spoken
dialogue. Otherwise it bears the earmarks. A zarzuela stands somewhere
between a French _revue_ and opéra-comique. It is usually, however,
more informal in tone than the latter and often decidedly more serious
than the former. All the musicians in Spain since the form was invented
(excepting, of course, certain exclusively religious composers), and
most of the poets and playwrights, have contributed numerous examples.
Thus Calderon wrote the first zarzuela, and Lope de Vega contributed
words to entertainments much in the same order. In our day Spain’s
leading dramatist, Echegaray (died 1916), has written one of the most
popular zarzuelas, _Gigantes y Cabezudos_ (the music by Caballero).
The subject is the fiesta of Santa Maria del Pilar. It has had many a
long run and is often revived. Another very popular zarzuela, which
was almost, if not quite, heard in New York, is _La Gran Via_ (by
Valverde, _père_), which has been performed in London in extended
form. The principal theatres for the zarzuela in Madrid are (or were
until recently) that of the Calle de Jovellanos, called the Teatro de
Zarzuela, and the Apolo. Usually four separate zarzuelas are performed
in one evening before as many audiences.

_La Gran Via_, which in some respects may be considered a typical
zarzuela, consists of a string of dance tunes, with no more
homogeneity than their national significance would suggest. There is
an introduction and polka, a waltz, a tango, a jota, a mazurka, a
schottische, another waltz, and a two-step (_paso-doble_). The tunes
have little distinction; nor can the orchestration be considered
brilliant. There is a great deal of noise and variety of rhythm, and
when presented correctly the effect must be precisely that of one of
the dance-halls described by Chabrier. The zarzuela, to be enjoyed,
in fact, must be seen in Spain. Like Spanish dancing it requires a
special audience to bring out its best points. There must be a certain
electricity, at least an element of sympathy, to carry the thing
through successfully. Examination of the scores of zarzuelas (many
of them have been printed and some of them are to be seen in our
libraries) will convince any one that Mr. Ellis is speaking mildly
when he says that the Spaniards love noise. However, the combination
of this noise with beautiful women, dancing, elaborate rhythm, and a
shouting audience, seems to almost equal the café-concert dancing and
the tauromachian spectacles in Spanish popular affection. (Of course,
as I have suggested, there are zarzuelas more serious melodically and
dramatically; but as _La Gran Via_ is frequently mentioned by writers
as one of the most popular examples, it may be selected as typical of
the larger number of these entertainments.)

H. V. Hamilton says that the first performance of a zarzuela took
place in 1628 (Pedrell gives the date as October 29, 1629), during
the reign of Felipe IV, in the Palace of the Zarzuela (so-called
because it was surrounded by _zarzas_, brambles). It was called _El
Jardin de Falerina_; the text was by the great Calderon and the music
by Juan Risco, chapelmaster of the cathedral at Cordova, according to
Mr. Hamilton, who doubtless follows Soriano Fuertes on this detail.
Soubies, following the more modern studies of Pedrell, gives Jose Peyró
the credit. Pedrell, in his richly documented work, “Teatro Lírico
Española anterior al siglo XIX,” attributes the music of this zarzuela
to Peyró and gives an example of it. The first Spanish opera dates from
the same period, Lope de Vega’s _La Selva sin Amor_ (1629). As a matter
of fact, many of the plays of Calderon and Lope de Vega were performed
with music to heighten the effect of the declamation, and musical
curtain-raisers and interludes were performed before and in the midst
of all of them. Lana, Palomares, Benavente and Hidalgo were among the
musicians who contributed music to the theatre of this period. Hidalgo
wrote the music for Calderon’s zarzuela, _Ni Amor se Libre de Amor_. To
the same group belong Miguel Ferrer, Juan de Navas, Sebastien de Navas,
and Jéronimo de la Torre. (Examples of the music of these men may be
found in the aforementioned “Teatro Lírico.”) Until 1659 zarzuelas
were written by the best poets and composers and frequently performed
on royal birthdays, at royal marriages, and on many other occasions;
but after that date the art fell into a decline and seems to have
been in eclipse during the whole of the eighteenth century. According
to Soriano Fuertes the beginning of the reign of Felipe V marked the
introduction of Italian opera into Spain (more popular than Spanish
opera there to this day) and the decadence of nationalism (whole pages
of Fuertes read very much like the plaints of modern English composers
about the neglect of national composers in their country). In 1829
there was a revival of interest in Spanish music and a conservatory was
founded in Madrid. (For a discussion of this later period the reader
is referred to “La Opera Española en el Siglo XIX,” by Antonio Peña y
Goñi, 1881.) This interest has been fostered by Fuertes and Pedrell,
and the younger composers to-day are taking some account of it. There
is hope, indeed, that Spanish music may again take its place in the
world of art.

Of course, the zarzuela did not spring into being out of nowhere and
nothing, and the true origins are not entirely obscure. It is generally
agreed that a priest, Juan del Encina (born at Salamanca, 1468),
was the true founder of the secular theatre in Spain. His dramatic
compositions are in the nature of eclogues based on Virgilian models.
In all of these there is singing and in one a dance. Isabel la Católica
in the fifteenth century always had at her command a troop of musicians
and poets who comforted and consoled her in her chapel with motets
and _plegarias_ (French, _prière_), and in the royal apartments with
_canciones_ and _villancicos_. (_Canciones_ are songs inclining towards
the ballad-form. _Villancicos_ are songs in the old Spanish measure;
they receive their name from their rustic character, as supposedly they
were first composed by the _villanos_ or peasants for the nativity and
other festivals of the church.) “It is necessary to search for the true
origins of the Spanish musical spectacle,” states Soubies, “in the
_villancicos_ and _cantacillos_ which alternated with the dialogue in
the works of Juan del Encina and Lucas Fernandez, without forgetting
the _ensaladas_, the _jacaras_, etc., which served as intermezzi and
curtain-raisers.” These were sung before the curtain, before the
drama was performed (and during the intervals, with jokes added) by
women in court dress, and later created a form of their own (besides
contributing to the creation of the zarzuela), the _tonadilla_, which,
accompanied by a guitar or violin and interspersed with dances, was
very popular for a number of years. H. V. Hamilton is probably on
sound ground when he says, “That the first zarzuela was written with
an express desire for expansion and development is, however, not so
certain as that it was the result of a wish to inaugurate the new house
of entertainment with something entirely original and novel.”


VI

We have Richard Ford’s testimony that Spain was not very musical in his
day. The Reverend Henry Cart de Lafontaine says that the contemporary
musical services in the churches are not to be considered seriously
from an artistic point of view. Emmanuel Chabrier was impressed with
the fact that the music for dancing was almost entirely rhythmic in its
effect, strummed rudely on the guitar, the spectators meanwhile making
such a din that it was practically impossible to distinguish a melody,
had there been one. And all observers point at the Italian opera, which
is still the favourite opera in Spain (in Barcelona at the Liceo three
weeks of opera in Catalon is given after the regular season in Italian;
in Madrid at the Teatro Real the Spanish season is scattered through
the Italian), and at Señor Arbós’s concerts (the same Señor Arbós who
was once concert master of the Boston Symphony Orchestra), at which
Brandenburg concertos and Beethoven symphonies are more frequently
performed than works by Albeniz. Still there are, and have always been
during the course of the last century, Spanish composers, some of whom
have made a little noise in the outer world, although a good many have
been content to spend their artistic energy on the manufacture of
zarzuelas--in other words, to make a good deal of noise in Spain. In
most modern instances, however, there has been a revival of interest
in the national forms, and folk-song and folk-dance have contributed
their important share to the composers’ work. No one man has done more
to encourage this interest in nationalism than Felipe Pedrell, who may
be said to have begun in Spain the work which the “Five” accomplished
in Russia. Pedrell says in his “Handbook” (Barcelona, 1891; Heinrich
and Co.; French translation by Bertal; Paris, Fischbacher): “The
popular song, the voice of the people, the pure primitive inspiration
of the anonymous singer, passes through the alembic of contemporary art
and one obtains thereby its quintessence; the composer assimilates
it and then reveals it in the most delicate form that music alone is
capable of rendering form in its technical aspect, this thanks to the
extraordinary development of the technique of our art in this epoch.
The folk-song lends the accent, the background, and modern art lends
all that it possesses, its conventional symbolism and the richness of
form which is its patrimony. The frame is enlarged in such a fashion
that the _lied_ makes a corresponding development; could it be said
then that the national lyric drama is the same _lied_ expanded? Is
not the national lyric drama the product of the force of absorption
and creative power? Do we not see in it faithfully reflected not only
the artistic idiosyncrasy of each composer, but all the artistic
manifestations of the people?” There is always the search for new
composers in Spain and always the hope that a man may come who will
be acclaimed by the world. As a consequence, the younger composers
in Spain often receive more adulation than is their due. It must be
remembered that the most successful Spanish music is not serious, the
Spanish are more themselves in the lighter vein.

I hesitate for a moment on the name of Martin y Solar, born at
Valencia; died at St. Petersburg, 1806; called “The Italian” by the
Spaniards on account of his musical style, and “lo Spagnuolo” by the
Italians. Da Ponte wrote several opera-books for him, _l’Arbore di
Diana_, _la Cosa Rara_, and _La Capricciosa Corretta_ (a version of
_The Taming of the Shrew_) among others. It is to be seen that he is
without importance if considered as a composer distinctively Spanish
and I have made this slight reference to him solely to recount how
Mozart quoted an air from one of his operas in the supper scene of
_Don Giovanni_. At the time Martin y Solar was better liked in Vienna
than Mozart himself and the air in question was as well-known as say
Musetta’s waltz is known to us.

Juan Chrysostomo Arriaga, born in Bilbao 1808; died 1828 (these dates
are given in Grove: 1806-1826), is another matter. He might have become
better known had he lived longer. As it is, some of his music has been
performed in London and Paris, and perhaps in America, although I have
no record of it. He studied in Paris at the Conservatoire, under Fétis
for harmony, and Baillot for violin. Before he went to Paris even, as
a child, with no knowledge of the rules of harmony, he had written
an opera! Cherubini declared his fugue for eight voices on the words
in the Credo, “Et Vitam Venturi” a veritable chef d’œuvre, at least
there is a legend to this effect. In 1824 he wrote three quartets, an
overture, a symphony, a mass, and some French cantatas and romances.
Garcia considered his opera _Los Esclavas Felices_ so good that he
attempted, unsuccessfully, to secure for it a Paris hearing. It has
been performed in Bilbao, which city, I think, celebrated the centenary
of the composer’s birth.

Manuel Garcia is better known to us as a singer, an impresario, and a
father, than as a composer! Still he wrote a good deal of music (so
did Mme. Malibran; for a list of the diva’s compositions I must refer
the reader to Arthur Pougin’s biography). Fétis enumerates seventeen
Spanish, nineteen Italian, and seven French operas by Garcia. He had
works produced in Madrid, at the Opéra in Paris (_La mort du Tasse_
and _Florestan_), at the Italiens in Paris (_Fazzoletto_), at the
Opéra-Comique in Paris (_Deux Contrats_), and at many other theatres.
However, when all is said and done, Manuel Garcia’s reputation
still rests on his singing and his daughters. His compositions are
forgotten; nor was his music, much of it, probably, truly Spanish.
(However, I have heard a polo [serenade] from an opera called _El
Poeta Calculista_, which is so Spanish in accent and harmony--and so
beautiful--that it has found a place in a collection of folk-tunes!)

Miguel Hilarion Eslava (born in Burlada, October 21, 1807, died at
Madrid, July 23, 1878) is chiefly famous for his compilation, the
“Lira Sacra-Hispana,” mentioned heretofore. He also composed over 140
pieces of church music, masses, motets, songs, etc., after he had been
appointed chapelmaster of Queen Isabella in 1844, and several operas,
including _Il Solitario_, _La Tregua di Ptolemaide_, and _Pedro el
Cruél_. He also wrote several books of theory and composition: “Método
de Solfeo” (1846) and “Escuela de Armonía y Composición” in three parts
(harmony, composition, and melody). He edited (1855-6) the “Gaceta
Músical de Madrid.”

There is the celebrated virtuoso, Pablo de Sarasate, who wrote music,
but his memory is perhaps better preserved in Whistler’s diabolical
portrait than in his own compositions.

Felipe Pedrell (born February 19, 1841) is also perhaps more important
as a writer on musical subjects and for his influence on the younger
school of composers (he teaches in the conservatory of Barcelona, and
his attitude towards nationalism has already been discussed), than he
is as a composer. Still, Edouard Lopez-Chavarri does not hesitate to
pronounce his trilogy _Los Pireneos_ (Barcelona, 1902; the prologue
was performed in Venice in 1897) the most important work for the
theatre written in Spain. His first opera, _El Último Abencerrajo_, was
produced in Barcelona in 1874. Some of his other works are _Quasimodo_,
1875; _El Tasso a Ferrara_, _Cleopatra_, _Mazeppa_ (Madrid, 1881),
_Celestine_ (1904), and _La Matinada_ (1905). J. A. Fuller-Maitland
says that the influence of Wagner is traceable in all his stage work.
(Wagner is adored in Spain; _Parsifal_ was given eighteen times in one
month at the Liceo in Barcelona.) If this be true, his case will be
found to bear other resemblances to that of the Russian “Five,” who
found it difficult to exorcise all foreign influences in their pursuit
of nationalism.

He was made a member of the Spanish Academy in 1894 and shortly
thereafter became Professor of Musical History and Æsthetics at the
Royal Conservatory at Madrid. Besides his “Hispaniae Schola Musica
Sacra” he has written a number of other books, and translated Richter’s
treatise on Harmony into Spanish. He has made several excursions into
the history of folk-lore and the principal results are contained in
“Músicos Anónimos” and “Por nuestra Música.” Other works are “Teatro
Lírico Español anterior al siglo XIX,” “Lírica Nacionalizada,” “De
Música Religiosa,” “Músiquerias y mas Músiquesias.” One of his books,
“Músicos Contemporáneos y de Otros Tempos” (in the library of the
Hispanic Society of New York) is very catholic in its range of subject.
It includes essays on the _Don Quixote_ of Strauss, the _Boris Godunow_
of Moussorgsky, Smetana, Manuel Garcia, Edward Elgar, Jaques-Dalcroze,
Bruckner, Mahler, Albeniz, Palestrina, Busoni, and the tenth symphony
of Beethoven!

In John Towers’s extraordinary compilation, “Dictionary-Catalogue of
Operas,” it is stated that Manuel Fernandez Caballero (born in 1835)
wrote sixty-two operas, and the names of them are given. He was a
pupil of Fuertes (harmony) and Eslava (composition) at the Madrid
Conservatory and later became very popular as a writer of zarzuelas. I
have already mentioned his _Gigantes y Cabezudos_ for which Echegaray
furnished the libretto. Among his other works in this form are _Los
Dineros del Sacristan_, _Los Africanistas_ (Barcelona, 1894), _El Cabo
Primero_ (Barcelona, 1895), and _La Rueda de la Fortuna_ (Madrid, 1896).

At a concert given in the New York Hippodrome, April 3, 1911, Mme.
Tetrazzini sang a Spanish song, which was referred to the next day
by the reviewers of the “New York Times” and the “New York Globe.”
To say truth the soprano made a great effect with the song, although
it was written for a low voice. It was _Carceleras_, from Ruperto
Chapí’s zarzuela _Hija del Zebedeo_. Chapí was one of the most prolific
and popular composers of Spain during the last century. He produced
countless zarzuelas and nine children. He was born at Villena March
27, 1851, and he died March 25, 1909, a few months earlier than his
compatriot Isaac Albeniz. He was admitted to the conservatory of Madrid
in 1867 as a pupil of piano and harmony. In 1869 he obtained the first
prize for harmony and he continued to obtain prizes until in 1874 he
was sent to Rome by the Academy of Fine Arts. He remained for some
time in Italy and Paris. In 1875 the Teatro Real of Madrid played his
_La Hija de Jefté_ sent from Rome. The following is an incomplete
list of his operas and zarzuelas: _Via Libra_, _Los Gendarmes_, _El
Rey que Rabio_ (3 acts), _La Verbena de la Paloma_, _El Reclamo_, _La
Tempestad_, _La Bruja_, _La Leyenda del Monje_, _Las Campanados_,
_La Czarina_, _El Milagro de la Virgen_, _Roger de Flor_ (3 acts),
_Las Naves de Cortes, Circe_ (3 acts), _A qui Base Farsa un Hombre_,
_Juan Francisco_ (3 acts, 1905; rewritten and presented in 1908 as
_Entre Rocas_), _Los Madrileños_ (1908), _La Dama Roja_ (1 act, 1908),
_Hesperia_ (1908), _Las Calderas de Pedro Bolero_ (1909) and _Margarita
la Tornera_, presented just before his death without success.

His other works include an oratorio, _Los Angeles_, a symphonic poem,
_Escenas de Capa y Espada_, a symphony in D, _Moorish Fantasy_ for
orchestra, a serenade for orchestra, a trio for piano, violin and
’cello, songs, etc. Chapí was president of the Society of Authors and
Composers, and when he died the King and Queen of Spain sent a telegram
of condolence to his widow. There is a copy of his zarzuela, _Blasones
y Talegas_ in the New York Public Library.

I have already spoken of _Dolores_. It is one of a long series of
operas and zarzuelas written by Tomás Bretón y Hernandez (born at
Salamanca, December 29, 1850). First produced at Madrid, in 1895, it
has been sung with success in such distant capitals as Buenos Ayres and
Prague. I have been assured by a Spanish woman of impeccable taste that
_Dolores_ is charming, delightful in its fluent melody and its striking
rhythms, thoroughly Spanish in style, but certain to find favour in
America, if it were produced here. Our own Eleanora de Cisneros at
a Press Club Benefit in Barcelona appeared in Bretón’s zarzuela _La
Verbena de la Paloma_. Another of Bretón’s famous zarzuelas is _Los
Amantes de Ternel_ (Madrid, 1889). His works for the theatre further
include _Tabaré_, for which he wrote both words and music (Madrid,
1913); _Don Gil_ (Barcelona, 1914); _Garin_ (Barcelona, 1891); _Raquel_
(Madrid, 1900); _Guzman el Bueno_ (Madrid, 1876); _El Certamen de
Cremona_ (Madrid, 1906); _El Campanere de Begoña_ (Madrid, 1878); _El
Barberillo en Orán_; _Corona contra Corona_ (Madrid, 1879); _Les Amores
de un Príncipe_ (Madrid, 1881); _El Clavel Rojo_ (1899); _Covadonga_
(1901); and _El Domingo de Ramos_, words by Echegaray (Madrid, 1894).
His works for orchestra include: _En la Alhambra_, _Los Galeotes_, and
_Escenas Andaluzas_, a suite. He has written three string quartets,
a piano trio, a piano quintet, and an oratorio in two parts, _El
Apocalipsis_.

Bretón is largely self-taught, and there is a legend that he devoured
by himself Eslava’s “School of Composition.” He further wrote the music
and conducted for a circus for a period of years. In the late seventies
he conducted an orchestra, founding a new society, the Union Artistico
Musical, which is said to have been the beginning of the modern
movement in Spain. It may throw some light on Spanish musical taste at
this period to mention the fact that the performance of Saint-Saëns’s
_Danse macabre_ almost created a riot. Later Bretón travelled. He
appeared as conductor in London, Prague, and Buenos Ayres, among other
cities outside of Spain, and when Dr. Karl Muck left Prague for Berlin,
he was invited to succeed him in the Bohemian capital. In the contest
held by the periodical “Blanco y Negro” in 1913 to decide who was the
most popular writer, poet, painter, musician, sculptor, and toreador in
Spain, Bretón as musician got the most votes.... He is at present the
head of the Royal Conservatory in Madrid.

No Spanish composer (ancient or modern) is better known outside of
Spain than Isaac Albeniz (born May 29, 1861, at Comprodon; died at
Cambo, in the Pyrenees, May 25, 1909). His fame rests almost entirely
on twelve piano pieces (in four books) entitled collectively _Iberia_,
with which all concert-goers are familiar. They have been performed
here by Ernest Schelling, Leo Ornstein, and George Copeland, among
other virtuosi.... I think one or two of these pieces must be in the
répertoire of every modern pianist. Albeniz did not imbibe his musical
culture in Spain and to the day of his death he was more friendly with
the modern French group of composers than with those of his native
land. In his music he sees Spain with French eyes. He studied at
Paris with Marmontel; at Brussels with Louis Brassin; and at Weimar
with Liszt (he is mentioned in the long list of pupils in Huneker’s
biography of Liszt, but there is no further account of him in that
book); he studied composition with Jadassohn, Joseph Dupont, and F.
Kufferath. His symphonic poem, _Catalonia_, has been performed in Paris
by the Colonne Orchestra. I have no record of any American performance.
For a time he devoted himself to the piano. He was a virtuoso and he
has even played in London, but later in life he gave up this career for
composition. He wrote several operas and zarzuelas, among them a light
opera, _The Magic Opal_ (produced in London, 1893), _Enrico Clifford_
(Barcelona, 1894; later heard in London), _Pepita Jiminez_ (Barcelona,
1895; afterwards given at the Théâtre de la Monnaie in Brussels),
and _San Anton de la Florida_ (produced in Brussels as _l’Ermitage
Fleurie_). He left unfinished at his death another opera destined for
production in Brussels at the Monnaie, _Merlin l’Enchanteur_. None
of his operas, with the exception of _Pepita Jiminez_, which has been
performed, I am told, in all Spanish countries, achieved any particular
success, and it is _Iberia_ and a few other piano pieces which will
serve to keep his memory green.

Juan Bautista Pujol (1836-1898) gained considerable reputation in Spain
as a pianist and as a teacher of and composer for that instrument. He
also wrote a method for piano students entitled “Nuevo Mecanismo del
Piano.” His further claim to attention is due to the fact that he was
one of the teachers of Granados.

The names of Pahissa (both as conductor and composer; one of his
symphonic works is called _The Combat_), Garcia Robles, represented by
an _Epitalame_, and Gibert, with two _Marines_, occur on the programmes
of the two concerts devoted in the main to Spanish music, at the second
of which (Barcelona, 1910; conductor Franz Beidler) Granados’s _Dante_
was performed.

E. Fernandez Arbós (born in Madrid, December 25, 1863) is better
known as a conductor and violinist than as composer. Still, he has
written music, especially for his own instrument. He was a pupil of
both Vieuxtemps and Joachim; and he has travelled much, teaching at
the Hamburg Conservatory, and acting as concertmaster for the Boston
Symphony and the Glasgow Orchestras. He has been a professor at the
Madrid conservatory for some time, giving orchestral and chamber
music concerts, both there and in London. He has written at least one
light opera, presumably a zarzuela, _El Centro de la Tierra_ (Madrid;
December 22, 1895); three trios for piano and strings, songs, and an
orchestral suite.

I have already referred to the Valverdes, father and son. The father,
in collaboration with Federico Chueca, wrote _La Gran Via_. Many
another popular zarzuela is signed by him. The son has lived so long in
France that much of his music is cast in the style of the French music
hall; too it is in a popular vein. Still in his best tangos he strikes
a Spanish folk-note not to be despised. He wrote the music for the
play, _La Maison de Danse_, produced, with Polaire, at the Vaudeville
in Paris, and two of his operettas, _La Rose de Grenade_ and _l’Amour
en Espagne_, have been performed in Paris, not without success, I am
told by La Argentina, who danced in them. Other modern composers who
have been mentioned to me are Manuel de Falla, Joaquin Turina (George
Copeland has played his _A los Toros_), Usandihaga (who died in 1915),
the composer of _Los Golondrinos_, Oscar Erpla, Conrado del Campo, and
Enrique Morera.

Enrique Granados was perhaps the first of the important Spanish
composers to visit North America. His place in the list of modern
Iberian musicians is indubitably a high one; though it must not be
taken for granted that _all_ the best music of Spain crosses the
Pyrenees (for reasons already noted it is evident that some Spanish
music can never be heard to advantage outside of Spain), and it is
by no means to be taken for granted that Granados was a greater
musician than several who dwell in Barcelona and Madrid without
making excursions into the outer world. In his own country I am told
Granados was admired chiefly as a pianist, and his performances on
that instrument in New York stamped him as an original interpretative
artist, one capable of extracting the last tonal meaning out of his own
compositions for the pianoforte, which are his best work.

Shortly after his arrival in New York he stated to several reporters
that America knew nothing about Spanish music, and that Bizet’s
_Carmen_ was not in any sense Spanish. I hold no brief for _Carmen_
being Spanish but it is effective, and that _Goyescas_ as an opera is
not. In the first place, its muddy and blatant orchestration would
detract from its power to please (this opinion might conceivably be
altered were the opera given under Spanish conditions in Spain).
The manuscript score of _Goyescas_ now reposes in the Museum of the
Hispanic Society, in that interesting quarter of New York where the
apartment houses bear the names of Goya and Velasquez, and it is
interesting to note that it is a _piano_ score. What has become of the
orchestral partition and who was responsible for it I do not know. It
is certain, however, that the miniature charm of the _Goyescas_ becomes
more obvious in the piano version, performed by Ernest Schelling or
the composer himself, than in the opera house. The growth of the work
is interesting. Fragments of it took shape in the composer’s brain
and on paper seventeen years ago, the result of the study of Goya’s
paintings in the Prado. These fragments were moulded into a suite in
1909 and again into an opera in 1914 (or before then). F. Periquet,
the librettist, was asked to fit words to the score, a task which he
accomplished with difficulty. Spanish is not an easy tongue to sing.
To Mme. Barrientos this accounts for the comparatively small number of
Spanish operas. _Goyescas_, like many a zarzuela, lags when the dance
rhythms cease. I find little joy myself in listening to “La Maja y
el Ruiseñor”; in fact, the entire last scene sounds banal to my ears.
In the four volumes of Spanish dances which Granados wrote for piano
(published by the Sociedad Anónima Casa Dotesio in Barcelona) I console
myself for my lack of interest in _Goyescas_. These lovely dances
combine in their artistic form all the elements of the folk-dances as
I have described them. They bespeak a careful study and an intimate
knowledge of the originals. And any pianist, amateur or professional,
will take joy in playing them.

Enrique Granados y Campina was born July 27, 1867, at Lerida,
Catalonia. (He died March 24, 1916; a passenger on the _Sussex_,
torpedoed in the English Channel.) From 1884 to 1887 he studied
piano under Pujol and composition under Felipe Pedrell at the Madrid
Conservatory. That the latter was his master presupposed on his part
a valuable knowledge of the treasures of Spain’s past and that, I
think, we may safely allow him. There is, I am told, an interesting
combination of classicism and folk-lore in his work. At any rate,
Granados was a faithful disciple of Pedrell. In 1898 his zarzuela
_Maria del Carmen_ was produced in Madrid and has since been heard in
Valencia, Barcelona, and other Spanish cities. Five years later some
fragments of another opera, _Foletto_, were produced at Barcelona.
His third opera, _Liliana_, was produced at Barcelona in 1911. He
wrote numerous songs to texts by the poet, Apeles Mestres; Galician
songs, two symphonic poems, _La Nit del Mort_ and _Dante_ (performed
by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra for the first time in America at the
concerts of November 5 and 6, 1915); a piano trio, string quartet, and
various books of piano music (_Danzas Españolas_, _Valses Poéticos_,
_Bocetos_, _etc._).


_New York, March 20, 1916._




Shall We Realize Wagner’s Ideals?




Shall We Realize Wagner’s Ideals?


Historians of operatic phenomena have observed that fashions in music
change; the popular Donizetti and Bellini of one century are suffered
to exist during the next only for the sake of the opportunity they
afford to some brilliant songstress. New tastes arise, new styles
in music. Dukas’s generally unrelished (and occasionally highly
appreciated) _Ariane et Barbe-Bleue_ may not be powerful enough
to establish a place for itself in the répertoire, but its direct
influence on composers and its indirect influence on auditors make this
lyric drama highly important as an indication of the future of opera as
a fine art. Moussorgsky’s _Boris Godunow_, first given in this country
some forty years after its production in Russia, is another matter.
That score contains a real thrill in itself, a thrill which, once felt,
makes it difficult to feel the intensity of a Wagner drama again:
because Wagner is becoming just a little bit old-fashioned. _Lohengrin_
and _Tannhäuser_ are becoming a trifle shop-worn. They do not glitter
with the glory of a _Don Giovanni_ or the invincible splendour of an
_Armide_. There are parts of _Die Walküre_ which are growing old. Now
Wagner, in many ways the greatest figure as opera composer which the
world has yet produced, could hold his place in the singing theatres
for many decades to come if some proper effort were made to do justice
to his dramas, the justice which in a large measure has been done to
his music. This effort at present is not being made.

In the Metropolitan Opera House season of 1895-6, when Jean de Reszke
first sang Tristan in German, the opportunity seemed to be opened for
further breaks with what a Munich critic once dubbed “Die Bayreuther
Tradition oder Der missverstandene Wagner.” For up to that time, in
spite of some isolated examples, it had come to be considered, in
utter misunderstanding of Wagner’s own wishes and doctrines, as a
part of the technique of performing a Wagner music-drama to shriek,
howl, or bark the tones, rather than to sing them. There had been, I
have said, isolated examples of German singers, and artists of other
nationalities singing in German, who had _sung_ their phrases in these
lyric plays, but the appearance in the Wagner rôles, in German, of a
tenor whose previous appearances had been made largely in works in
French and Italian which demanded the use of what is called _bel canto_
(it means only _good singing_) brought about a controversy which even
yet is raging in some parts of the world. Should Wagner be sung, in the
manner of Jean de Reszke, or shouted in the traditional manner? Was it
possible to sing the music and make the effect the Master expected? In
answer it may be said that never in their history have _Siegfried_,
_Tristan und Isolde_, and _Lohengrin_ met with such success as when
Jean de Reszke and his famous associates appeared in them, and it may
also be said that since that time there has been a consistent effort on
the part of the management of the Metropolitan Opera House (and other
theatres as well) to provide artists for these dramas who could sing
them, and sing them as Italian operas are sung, an effort to which
opera directors have been spurred by a growing insistence on the part
of the public.

It was the first break with the Bayreuth bugbear, tradition, and it
might have been hoped that this tradition would be stifled in other
directions, with this successful precedent in mind; but such has not
been the case. As a result of this failure to follow up a beneficial
lead, in spite of orchestral performances which bring out the manifold
beauties of the scores and in spite of single impersonations of high
rank by eminent artists, we are beginning to see the Wagner dramas
falling into decline, long before the appointed time, because their
treatment has been held in the hands of Cosima Wagner, who--with the
best of intentions, of course--not only insists (at Bayreuth she is
mistress, and her influence on singers, conductors, stage directors and
scene painters throughout the world is very great) on the carrying out
of Wagner’s theories, as she understands them, and even when they are
only worthy of being ignored, but who also (whether rightly or wrongly)
is credited with a few traditions of her own. Wagner indeed invented
a new form of drama, but he did not have the time or means at his
disposal to develop an adequate technique for its performance.

We are all familiar with the Bayreuth version of Wotan in _Die Walküre_
which makes of that tragic father-figure a boisterous, silly old
scold (so good an artist as Carl Braun, whose Hagen portrait is a
masterpiece, has followed this tradition literally); we all know too
well the waking Brünnhilde who salutes the sun in the last act of
_Siegfried_ with gestures seemingly derived from the exercises of a
Swedish _turnverein_, following the harp arpeggios as best she may;
we remember how Wotan, seizing the sword from the dead Fasolt’s hand,
brandishes it to the tune of the sword _motiv_, indicating the coming
of the hero, Siegfried, as the gods walk over the rainbow bridge to
Walhalla at the end of _Das Rheingold_; we smile over the tame horse
which some chorus man, looking the while like a truck driver who is
not good to animals, holds for Brünnhilde while she sings her final
lament in _Götterdämmerung_; we laugh aloud when he assists her to lead
the unfiery steed, who walks as leisurely as a well-fed horse would
towards oats, into the burning pyre; we can still see the picture of
the three Rhine maidens, bobbing up and down jerkily behind a bit of
gauze, reminiscent of visions of mermaids at the Eden Musée; we all
have seen Tristan and Isolde, drunk with the love potion, swimming
(there is no other word to describe this effect) towards each other;
and no perfect Wagnerite can have forgotten the gods and the giants
standing about in the fourth scene of _Das Rheingold_ for all the world
as if they were the protagonists of a fantastic minstrel show. (At a
performance of _Parsifal_ in Chicago Vernon Stiles discovered while he
was on the stage that his suspenders, which held his tights in place,
had snapped. For a time he pressed his hands against his groin; this
method proving ineffectual, he finished the scene with his hands behind
his back, pressed firmly against his waist-line. As he left the stage,
at the conclusion of the act, breathing a sigh of relief, he met
Loomis Taylor, the stage director. “Did you think my new gesture was
due to nervousness?” he asked. “No,” answered Taylor, “I thought it was
Bayreuth tradition!”)

These are a few of the Bayreuth precepts which are followed. There
are others. There are indeed many others. We all know the tendency
of conductors who have been tried at Bayreuth, or who have come
under the influence of Cosima Wagner, to drag out the _tempi_ to an
exasperating degree. I have heard performances of _Lohengrin_ which
were dragged by the conductor some thirty minutes beyond the ordinary
time. (Again the Master is held responsible for this tradition, but
though all composers like to have their own music last in performance
as long as possible, the tradition, perhaps, is just as authentic as
the story that Richard Strauss, when conducting _Tristan und Isolde_
at the Prinz-Regenten-Theatre in Munich, saved twenty minutes on the
ordinary time it takes to perform the work in order to return as soon
as possible to an interrupted game of Skat.)

But it is not tradition alone that is killing the Wagner dramas. In
many instances and in most singing theatres silly traditions are aided
in their work of destruction by another factor in hasty production.
I am referring to the frequent liberties which have been taken with
the intentions of the author. For, when expediency is concerned, no
account is taken of tradition, and, curiously enough, expediency
breaks with those traditions which can least stand being tampered
with. The changes, in other words, have not been made for the sake of
improvement, but through carelessness, or to save time or money, or
for some other cognate reason. An example of this sort of thing is the
custom of giving the _Ring_ dramas as a cycle in a period extending
over four weeks, one drama a week. It is also customary at the
Metropolitan Opera House in New York to entrust the rôle of Brünnhilde,
or of Siegfried, to a different interpreter in each drama, so that the
Brünnhilde who wakes in _Siegfried_ is not at all the Brünnhilde who
goes to sleep in _Die Walküre_. Then, although Brünnhilde exploits a
horse in _Götterdämmerung_, she possesses none in _Die Walküre_; none
of the other valkyries has a horse; Fricka’s goats have been taken
away from her, and she walks to the mountain-top holding her skirts
from under her feet for all the world as a lady of fashion might
as she ascended from a garden into a ballroom. At the Metropolitan
Opera House, and at other theatres where I have seen the dramas, the
decorations of the scenes of Brünnhilde’s falling asleep and of her
awakening are quite different.

Naturally, ingenious explanations have been devised to fit these cases.
For instance, one is told that animals are _never_ at home on the
stage. This explanation suffices perhaps for the animals which do not
appear, but how about those which do? The vague phrase, “the exigencies
of the répertoire,” is mentioned as the reason for the extension of
the cycle over several weeks, that and the further excuse that the
system permits people from nearby towns to make weekly visits to the
metropolis. Of course, Wagner intended that each of the _Ring_ dramas
should follow its predecessor on succeeding days in a festival week. If
the _Ring_ were so given in New York every season with due preparation,
careful staging, and the best obtainable cast, the occasions would
draw audiences from all over America, as the festivals at Bayreuth and
Munich do indeed draw audiences from all over the world. Ingenuous
is the word which best describes the explanation for the change in
Brünnhildes; one is told that the out-of-town subscribers to the series
prefer to hear as many singers as possible. They wish to “compare”
Brünnhildes, so to speak. Perhaps the real reason for divergence
from common sense is the difficulty the director of the opera house
would have with certain sopranos if one were allowed the full set of
performances. As for the change in the setting of Brünnhilde’s rock it
is pure expediency, nothing else. In _Die Walküre_, in which, between
acts, there is plenty of time to change the scenery, a heavy built
promontory of rocks is required for the valkyrie brood to stand on. In
_Siegfried_ and _Götterdämmerung_, where the scenery must be shifted in
short order, this particular setting is utilized only for duets. The
heavier elements of the setting are no longer needed, and are dispensed
with.

The mechanical devices demanded by Wagner are generally complied
with in a stupidly clumsy manner. The first scene of _Das Rheingold_
is usually managed with some effect now, although the swimming of
the Rhine maidens, who are dressed in absurd long floating green
nightgowns, is carried through very badly and seemingly without an
idea that such things have been done a thousand times better in other
theatres; the changes of scene in _Das Rheingold_ are accomplished in
such a manner that one fears the escaping steam is damaging the gauze
curtains; the worm and the toad are silly contrivances; the effect of
the rainbow is never properly conveyed; the ride of the valkyries is
frankly evaded by most stage managers; the bird in _Siegfried_ flies
like a sickly crow; the final scene in _Götterdämmerung_ would bring a
laugh from a Bowery audience: some flat scenery flaps over, a number
of chorus ladies fall on their knees, there is much bulging about of a
canvas sea, and a few red lights appear in the sky; the transformation
scenes in _Parsifal_ are carried out with as little fidelity to
symbolism, or truth, or beauty; and the throwing of the lance in
_Parsifal_ is always seemingly a wire trick rather than a magical one.

The scenery for the Wagner dramas, in all the theatres where I have
seen and heard them, has been built (and a great deal of it in
recent years from new designs) with a seemingly absolute ignorance
or determined evasion of the fact that there are artists who are now
working in the theatre. In making this statement I can speak personally
of performances I have seen at the Metropolitan Opera House, New
York; the Auditorium, Chicago; Covent Garden Theatre, London; La
Scala, Milan; the Opéra, Paris; and the Prinz-Regenten-Theatre in
Munich. Are there theatres where the Wagner dramas are better given?
I do not think so. Compare the scenery of _Götterdämmerung_ at the
Metropolitan Opera House with that of _Boris Godunow_, and you will
see how little care is being taken of Wagner’s ideals. In the one case
the flimsiest sort of badly painted and badly lighted canvas, mingled
indiscriminately with plastic objects, boughs, branches, etc., placed
next to painted boughs and branches, an effect calculated to throw the
falsity of the whole scene into relief; in the other case, an example
of a scene-painter’s art wrought to give the highest effect to the
drama it decorates. Take the decoration of the hall of the Gibichs
in which long scenes are enacted in both the first and last acts
of _Götterdämmerung_. The Gibichs are a savage, warlike, sinister,
primitive race. Now it is not necessary that the setting in itself be
strong, but it must suggest strength to the spectator. There is no
need to bring stone blocks or wood blocks on the stage; the artist
may work in black velvet if he wishes (it was of this material that
Professor Roller contrived a dungeon cell in _Fidelio_ which seemed to
be built of stone ten feet thick). It will be admitted, I think, by any
one who has seen the setting in question that it is wholly inadequate
to express the meaning of the drama. The scenes could be sung with a
certain effect in a Christian Science temple, but no one will deny,
I should say, that the effect of the music may be greatly heightened
by proper attention to the stage decoration and the movement of
the characters in relation to the lighting and decoration. (I have
used the Metropolitan Opera House, in this instance, as a convenient
illustration; but the scenery there is no worse, on the whole, than it
is in many of the other theatres named.)

The secret at the bottom of the whole matter is that the directors of
the singing theatres wish to save themselves trouble. They will spend
neither money nor energy in righting this wrong. It is easier to trust
to tradition on the one hand and expediency on the other than it would
be to engage an expert (one not concerned with what had been done,
but one concerned with what to do) to produce the works. _Carmen_ was
losing its popularity in this country when Emma Calvé, who had broken
all the rules made for the part by Galli-Marié, enchanted opera-goers
with her fantastic conception of the gipsy girl. Bizet’s work had
dropped out of the répertoire again when Mme. Bressler-Gianoli arrived
and carried it triumphantly through nearly a score of performances
during the first season of Oscar Hammerstein’s Manhattan Opera House.
Geraldine Farrar and Toscanini resuscitated the Spanish jade a third
time. An Olive Fremstad or a Lilli Lehmann or a Milka Ternina can
perform a like office for _Götterdämmerung_ or _Tristan und Isolde_;
but it is to a new producer, an Adolphe Appia or a Gordon Craig, that
the theatre director must look for the final salvation of Wagner,
through the complete realization of his own ideals. It must be obvious
to any one that the more completely the meaning of his plays is exposed
by the decoration, the lighting and the action, the greater the effect.

Adolphe Appia wrote a book called “Die Musik und die Inscenierung,”
which was published in German in 1899. (An earlier work, “La
mise-en-scène du drame Wagnerien,” appeared in Paris in 1893.) Since
then his career has been strangely obscure for one whose effect on
artists working at stage decoration has been greater than that of any
other single man. In the second edition of his book, “On the Art of the
Theatre,” Gordon Craig, in a footnote, speaks thus of Appia: “Appia,
_the foremost stage decorator of Europe_ (the italics are mine) is not
dead. I was told that he was no more with us, so, in the first edition
of this book, I included him among the shades. I first saw three
examples of his work in 1908, and I wrote a friend asking, ‘Where is
Appia and how can we meet?’ My friend replied, ‘Poor Appia died some
years ago.’ This winter (1912) I saw some of Appia’s designs in a
portfolio belonging to Prince Wolkonsky. They were divine; and I was
told that the designer was still living.”

Loomis Taylor, who, during the season of 1914-15, staged the Wagner
operas at the Metropolitan Opera House (and it was not his fault that
the staging was not improved; there is no stage director now working
who has more belief in and knowledge of the artists of the theatre than
Loomis Taylor) has written me, in response to a query, the following
regarding Appia: “Adolphe Appia, I think, is a French-Swiss; he is a
young man. The title of the book which made him famous, in its German
translation, is ‘Die Musik und die Inscenierung.’ It was translated
from the French by Princess Cantacuzène.... Five years ago I was told
by Mrs. Houston Stewart Chamberlain that Appia was slowly but surely
starving to death in some picturesque surroundings in Switzerland. I
then tried to get various people in Germany interested in him, also
proposing him to Hagemann as scenic artist for Mannheim. Two years
later, before his starving process had reached its conclusion, I heard
of him as collaborator with Jaques-Dalcroze at his temple of rhythm
on the banks of the Elbe, outside of Dresden, where, I think, up to
the outbreak of the war, Appia was doing very good work, but what has
become of him since I do not know.

“His book is very valuable; his suggestions go beyond the possibilities
of the average Hof theatre, while in Bayreuth they have a similar
effect to a drop of water upon a stone, sun-burned by the rays of
Cosima’s traditions. By being one of the first--if not _the_ first--to
put in writing the inconsistency of using painted perspective scenery
and painted shadows with human beings on the stage, Appia became the
fighter for plastic scenery. His sketch of the _Walküren_ rock is the
most beautiful scenic conception of Act III, _Die Walküre_, I know of
or could imagine. To my knowledge no theatre has ever produced anything
in conformity with Appia’s sketches.”

In a letter to me Hiram Kelly Moderwell, whose book, “The Theatre of
To-day,” is the best exposition yet published of the aims and results
of the artists who are working in the theatre, writes as follows in
regard to Appia: “Appia is now with Dalcroze at Hellerau and I believe
has designed and perhaps produced all the things that have been done
there in the last year or two. Previous to that I am almost certain he
had done no actual stage work. Nobody else would give him free rein.
But, as you know, he thought everything out carefully as though he
were doing the actual practical stage work.... By this time he has hit
his ‘third manner.’ It’s all cubes and parallelograms. It sounds like
hell on paper but Maurice Browne told me it is very fine stuff. Browne
says it is as much greater than Craig as Craig is greater than anybody
else. All the recent Hellerau plays are in this third manner. They are
lighted by Salzmann, indirect and diffused lighting, but not in the
Fortuny style. I imagine the Hellerau stuff is rather too precious to
go on the ordinary stage.”

Mr. Moderwell’s description of Appia’s book is so completely
illuminating that I feel I cannot do better than to quote the entire
passage from “The Theatre of To-day”: “Before his (Gordon Craig’s)
influence was felt, however, Adolphe Appia, probably the most powerful
theorist of the new movement, had written his remarkable book, ‘Die
Musik und die Inscenierung.’ In this, as an artist, he attempted to
deduce from the content of the Wagner music dramas the proper stage
settings for them. His conclusions anticipated much of the best work of
recent years and his theories have been put into practice in more or
less modified form on a great many stages--not so much (if at all) for
the Wagner dramas themselves, which are under a rigid tradition (the
‘what the Master wished’ myth), but for operas and the more lyric plays
where the producer has artistic ability and a free hand in applying it.

“Appia started with the principle that the setting should make the
actor the all-important fact on the stage. He saw the realistic
impossibility of the realistic setting, and destructively analyzed the
current modes of lighting and perspective effects. But, unlike the
members of the more conventional modern school, he insisted that the
stage is a three-dimension space and must be handled so as to make its
depth living. He felt a contradiction between the living actor and the
dead setting. He wished to bind them into one whole--the drama. How was
this to be done?

“Appia’s answer to this question is his chief claim to
greatness--genius almost. His answer was--‘By means of the lighting.’
He saw the deadliness of the contemporary methods of lighting, and
previsaged with a sort of inspiration the possibilities of new methods
which have since become common. This was at a time when he had at
his disposal none of the modern lighting systems. His foreseeing of
modern practice by means of rigid Teutonic logic in the service of the
artist’s intuition makes him one of the two or three foremost theorists
of the modern movement.

“The lighting, for Appia, is the spiritual core, the soul of the
drama. The whole action should be contained in it, somewhat as we feel
the physical body of a friend to be contained in his personality.
Appia’s second great principle is closely connected with this. While
the setting is obviously inanimate, the actor must in every way be
emphasized and made living. And this can be accomplished, he says,
only by a wise use of lighting, since it is the lights and shadows
on a human body which reveal to our eyes the fact that the body is
‘plastic’--that is, a flexible body of three dimensions. Appia would
make the setting suggest only the atmosphere, not the reality of the
thing it stands for, and would soften and beautify it with the lights.
The actor he would throw constantly into prominence while keeping him
always a part of the scene. All the elements and all the action of the
drama he would bind together by the lights and shadows.

“With the most minute care each detail of lighting, each position
of each character, in Appia’s productions is studied out so that
the dramatic meaning shall always be evident. Hence any setting of
his contains vastly more thought than is visible at a glance. It is
designed to serve for every exigency of the scene--so that a character
here shall be in full light at a certain point, while talking directly
to a character who must be quite in the dark, or that the light shall
just touch the fringe of one character’s robe as she dies, or that the
action shall all take place unimpeded, and so on. At the same time,
needless to say, Appia’s stage pictures are of the highest artistic
beauty.”[1]

In Appia’s design for the third act of _Die Walküre_, so
enthusiastically praised by Loomis Taylor, the rock of the valkyries
juts like a huge promontory of black across the front of the scene,
silhouetted against a clouded sky. So all the figures of the valkyries
stand high on the rock and are entirely silhouetted, while Sieglinde
below in front of the rock in the blackness, is hidden from the rage
of the approaching Wotan. Any one who has seen this scene as it is
ordinarily staged, without any reference to beauty or reason, will
appreciate even this meagre description of an artist’s intention,
which has not yet been carried out in any theatre with which I have
acquaintance.

Appia’s design for the first scene of _Parsifal_ discloses a group
of boughless, straight-stemmed pines, towering to heaven like the
cathedral group at Vallombrosa. Overhead the dense foliage hides the
forest paths from the sun. Light comes in through the centre at the
back, where there is a vista of plains across to the mountains, on
which one may imagine the castle of the Grail. He places a dynamic and
dramatic value on light which it is highly important to understand in
estimating his work. For example, his lighting of the second act of
_Tristan und Isolde_ culminates in a _pitch-dark_ stage during the
singing of the love-duet. This artist has designed the scenery for all
the _Ring_ and has indicated throughout what the lighting and action
shall be.

I do not know that Gordon Craig has turned his attention to any
particular Wagner drama, although he has made suggestions for several
of them, but he could, if he would, devise a mode of stage decoration
which would make the plays and their action as appealing in their
beauty as the music and the singing often now are. In his book, “On the
Art of the Theatre,” he has been explicit in his descriptions of his
designs for _Macbeth_, and the rugged strength and symbolism of his
settings and ideas for that tragedy proclaim perhaps his best right to
be a leader in the reformation of the Wagner dramas, although, even
then, it must be confessed that Craig is derived in many instances from
Appia, whom Craig himself hails as the foremost stage decorator of
Europe to-day.

Read Gordon Craig on _Macbeth_ and you will get an idea of how an
artist would go to work on _Tristan und Isolde_ or _Götterdämmerung_.
“I see two things, I see a lofty and steep rock, and I see the moist
cloud which envelops the head of this rock. That is to say, a place
for fierce and warlike men to inhabit, a place for phantoms to nest
in. Ultimately this moisture will destroy the rock; ultimately these
spirits will destroy the men. Now then, you are quick in your question
as to what actually to create for the eye. I answer as swiftly--place
there a rock! Let it mount high. Swiftly I tell you, convey the idea of
a mist which hangs at the head of this rock. Now, have I departed at
all for one-eighth of an inch from the vision which I saw in the mind’s
eye?

“But you ask me what form this rock shall take and what colour? What
are the lines which are the lofty lines, and which are to be seen in
any lofty cliff? Go to them, glance but a moment at them; now quickly
set them down on your paper; _the lines and their direction_, never
mind the cliff. Do not be afraid to let them go high; they cannot go
high enough; and remember that on a sheet of paper which is but two
inches square you can make a line which seems to tower miles in the
air, and you can do the same on your stage, for it is all a matter of
proportion and has nothing to do with actuality.

“You ask about the colours? What are the colours which Shakespeare has
indicated for us? Do not first look at Nature, but look at the play
of the poet. Two, one for the rock, the man; one for the mist, the
spirit. Now, quickly, take and accept this statement from me. Touch
not a single other colour, but only these two colours through your
whole progress of designing your scenes and your costumes, yet forget
not that each colour contains many variations. If you are timid for a
moment and mistrust yourself or what I tell, when the scene is finished
you will not see with your eye the effect you have seen with your
mind’s eye when looking at the picture which Shakespeare has indicated.”

The producers of the Wagner music dramas do not seem to have heard
of Adolphe Appia. Gordon Craig is a myth to them. Reinhardt does not
exist. Have they ever seen the name of Stanislawsky? Do they know
where his theatre is? Would they consider it sensible to spend three
years in mounting _Hamlet_? Is the name of Fokine known to them? of
Bakst? N. Roerich, Nathalie Gontcharova, Alexandre Benois, Theodore
Federowsky?... One could go on naming the artists of the theatre.
(Recently there have been evidences of an art movement in the theatre
in America. Joseph Urban, first in Boston with the Boston Opera
Company, and later in New York with various theatrical enterprises,
may be mentioned as an important figure in this movement. His settings
for _Monna Vanna_ were particularly beautiful and he really seems to
have revolutionized the staging of _revues_ and similar light musical
pieces. Robert Jones has done some very good work. I think he was
responsible for the imaginative staging [in Gordon Craig’s manner, to
be sure] of the inner scenes in the Shakespeare mask, _Caliban_. But I
would give the Washington Square Players credit for the most successful
experiments which have been made in New York. In every instance they
have attempted to suit the staging to the mood of the drama, and have
usually succeeded admirably, at slight expense. They have developed
a good deal of previously untried talent in this direction. Lee
Simonson, in particular, has achieved distinctive results. I have
seldom seen better work of its kind on the stage than his settings
for _The Magical City_, _Pierre Patelin_, and _The Seagull_. At the
Metropolitan Opera House no account seems to be taken of this art
movement, although during the season of 1915-16 in _The Taming of the
Shrew_ an attempt was made to emulate the very worst that has been done
in modern Germany.)

For several years the Russian Ballet, under the direction of Serge
de Diaghilew, has been presenting operas and ballets in the European
capitals, notably in London and Paris for long seasons each summer
(the Ballet has been seen in America since this article was written).
A number of artists and a number of stage directors have been working
together in staging these works, which, as a whole, may be conceded
to be the most completely satisfying productions which have been made
on the stage during the progress of this new movement in the theatre.
One or two of the German productions, or Gordon Craig’s _Hamlet_
in Stanislawsky’s theatre, may have surpassed them in the sterner
qualities of beauty, the serious truth of their art, but none has
surpassed them in brilliancy, in barbaric splendour, or in their almost
complete solution of the problems of mingling people with painted
scenery. The Russians have solved these problems by a skilful (and
passionately liberal) use of colour and light. The painted surfaces
are mostly flat, to be sure, and crudely painted, but the tones of
the canvas are so divinely contrived to mingle with the tones of the
costumes that the effect of an animated picture is arrived at with
seemingly very little pother. This method of staging is not, in most
instances, it must be admitted, adapted to the requirements of the
Wagner dramas. Bakst, I imagine, would find it difficult to cramp
his talents in the field of Wagnerism, though he should turn out a
very pretty edition of _Das Rheingold_. Roerich, on the other hand,
who designed the scenery and costumes for _Prince Igor_ as it was
presented in Paris and London in the summer of 1914, would find no
difficulty in staging _Götterdämmerung_. The problem is the same: to
convey an impression of barbarism and strength. One scene I remember in
Borodine’s opera in which an open window, exposing only a clear stretch
of sky--the rectangular opening occupied half of the wall at the back
of the room--was made to act the drama. A few red lights skilfully
played on the curtain representing the sky made it seem as if in truth
a city were burning and I thought how a similar simple contrivance
might make a more imaginative final scene for _Götterdämmerung_.

It is, however, in their handling of mechanical problems that the
Russians could assist the new producer of the Wagner dramas to his
greatest advantage. In Rimsky-Korsakow’s opera, _The Golden Cock_,
for instance, the bird of the title has several appearances to make.
Now there was no attempt made, in the Russians’ stage version of this
work, to have this bird jiggle along a supposedly invisible wire, in
reality quite visible, flapping his artificial wings and wiggling his
insecure feet, as in the usual productions of _Siegfried_. Instead the
bird was built solid like a bronze cock for a drawing-room table; he
did not flap his wings; his feet were motionless; when the action of
the drama demanded his presence he was let down on a wire; there was
no pretence of a lack of machinery. The effect, however, was vastly
more imaginative and diverting than that in _Siegfried_, because it was
more simple. In like manner King Dodon, in the same opera, mounted a
wooden horse on wheels to go to the wars, and the animals he captured
were also made of wood, studded with brilliant beads. In Richard
Strauss’s ballet, _The Legend of Joseph_, the figure of the guardian
angel was not let down on a wire from the flies as he might have been
in a Drury Lane pantomime; the naïve nature of the work was preserved
by his nonchalant entrance across the _loggia_ and down a flight of
steps, exactly the entrance of all the human characters of the ballet.
I do not mean to suggest that these particular expedients would fit
into the Wagner dramas so well as they do into works of a widely
different nature. They should, however, indicate to stage directors the
possibility of finding a method to suit the case in each instance. And
I do assert, without hope or fear of contradiction, that Brünnhilde
with a wooden horse would challenge less laughter than she does with
the sorry nags which are put at her disposal and which Siegfried later
takes down the river with him. It is only down the river that one
can sell such horses. As for the bird, there are bird trainers whose
business it is to teach pigeons to fly from pillar to post in the music
halls; their services might be contracted for to make that passage
in _Siegfried_ a little less distracting. The difficulties connected
with this particular mechanical episode (and a hundred others) might
be avoided by a different lighting of the scene. If the tree-tops of
the forest were submerged in the deepest shadows, as well they might
be, the flight of the bird on a wire might be accomplished with some
sort of illusion. But why should one see the bird at all? One hears it
constantly as it warbles advice to the hero.

The new Wagner producer must possess many qualities if he wishes to
place these works on a plane where they may continue to challenge the
admiration of the world. Wagner himself was more concerned with his
ideals than he was with their practical solution. Besides, it must be
admitted that taste in stage art and improvements in stage mechanism
have made great strides in the last decade. The plaster wall, for
instance, which has replaced in many foreign theatres the flapping,
swaying, wrinkled, painted canvas sky cyclorama (still in use at the
Metropolitan Opera House; a vast sum was paid for it a few years ago)
is a new invention and one which, when appropriately lighted, perfectly
counterfeits the appearance of the sky in its different moods. (So
far as I know the only theatre in New York with this apparatus is
the Neighborhood Playhouse on Grand Street.) In Houston Stewart
Chamberlain’s “Richard Wagner,” published in 1897, I find the following:

“Wagner foresaw that in the new drama the whole principle of the stage
scenery must undergo a complete alteration but did not particularize in
detail. The _Meister_ says that ‘music resolves the rigid immovable
groundwork of the scenery into a liquid, yielding, ethereal surface,
capable of receiving impressions’; but to prevent a painful conflict
between what is seen and what is heard, the stage picture, too, must
be relieved from the curse of rigidity which now rests upon it. The
only way of doing this is by managing the light in a manner which
its importance deserves, that its office may no longer be confined
to illuminating painted walls.... I am convinced that the next great
advance in the drama will be of this nature, in the art of the eye,
and not in music.” (The passage quoted further refers to Appia’s first
book, published in French. Chamberlain was a close friend of Appia and
“Die Musik und die Inscenierung” is dedicated to him.)

It must also be understood that Wagner in some instances, when the
right medium of his expression was clear to him, made concessions to
what he considered the unintelligence of the public. Wotan’s waving of
the sword is a case in point. The _motiv_ without the object he did
not think would carry out the effect he intended to convey, although
the absurdity of Wotan’s founding his new humanity on the power of the
degenerate giants must have been apparent to him. Sometimes the Master
changed his mind. Paris would have none of _Tannhäuser_ without a
ballet and so Wagner rewrote the first act and now the Paris version
of the opera is the accepted one. In any case it must be apparent that
what Wagner wanted was a fusion of the arts, and a completely artistic
one. So that if any one can think of a better way of presenting his
dramas than one based on the very halting staging which he himself
devised (with the limited means at his command) as perhaps the best
possible to exploit his ideals, that person should be hailed as
Wagner’s friend. It must be seen, at any current presentation of his
dramas, that his way, or Cosima’s, is not the best way. The single
performances which have made the deepest impression on the public have
deviated the farthest from tradition. Olive Fremstad’s Isolde was far
from traditional. Her very costume of deep green was a flaunt in the
face of Wagner’s conventionally white robed heroine. In the first
act, after taking the love potion, she did not indulge in any of the
swimming movements usually employed by sopranos to pass the time away
until the occasion came to sing again. She stood as a woman dazed,
passing her hands futilely before her eyes, and it was to be noted
that in some instances her action had its supplement in the action of
the tenor who was singing with her, although, in other instances, he
would continue to swim in the most highly approved Bayreuth fashion.
But Olive Fremstad, artist that she was, could not completely divorce
herself from tradition; in some cases she held to it against her
judgment. The stage directions for the second act of _Parsifal_, for
example, require Kundry to lie on her couch, tempting the hero, for
a very long time. Great as Fremstad’s Kundry was, it might have been
improved if she had allowed herself to move more freely along the
lines that her artistic conscience dictated. Her Elsa was a beautiful
example of the moulding of the traditional playing of a rôle into a
picturesque, imaginative figure, a feat similar to that which Mary
Garden accomplished in her delineation of Marguerite in _Faust_. Mme.
Fremstad always sang Brünnhilde in _Götterdämmerung_ throughout with
the fire of genius. This was surely some wild creature, a figure of
Greek tragedy, a Norse Elektra. The superb effect she wrought, at her
first performance in the rôle, with the scene of the spear, was never
tarnished in subsequent performances. The thrill was always there.

In face of acting and singing like that one can afford to ignore
Wagner’s theory about the wedding of the arts. A Fremstad or a Lehmann
can carry a Wagner drama to a triumphant conclusion with few, if
any, accessories, but great singing artists are rare; nor does a
performance of this kind meet the requirements of the Wagner ideal, in
which the picture, the word, and the tone shall all be a part of the
drama (_Wort-Tondrama_). Wagner invented a new form of stage art but
only in a small measure did he succeed in perfecting a method for its
successful presentation. The artist-producer must arise to repair this
deficiency, to become the dominating force in future performances, to
see that the scenes are painted in accordance with the principles of
beauty and dramatic fitness, to see that they are lighted to express
the secrets of the drama, as Appia says they should be, to see that
the action is sympathetic with the decoration, and that the decoration
never encumbers the action, that the lighting assists both. There never
has been a production of the _Ring_ which has in any sense realized its
true possibilities, the ideal of Wagner.


_June 24, 1915._


FOOTNOTES:

[1] For a further discussion of Appia’s work and its probable influence
on Gordon Craig, see an article “Adolphe Appia and Gordon Craig” in my
book “Music After the Great War.”




  The Bridge Burners

  “_Zieh’hin! ich kann dich nicht halten!_”

                                Der Wanderer.




The Bridge Burners


I

It is from the enemy that one learns. Richelieu and other great men
have found it folly to listen to the advice of friends when rancour,
hatred, and jealousy inspired much more helpful suggestions. And it
occurred to me recently that the friends of modern music were doing
nothing by way of describing it. They are content to like it. I must
confess that I have been one of these. I have heard first performances
of works by Richard Strauss and Claude Debussy on occasions when
the programme notes gave one cause for dread. At these times I have
often been pleasurably excited and I have never lacked for at least a
measured form of enjoyment except when I found those gods growing a bit
old. The English critics were right when they labelled _The Legend of
Joseph_ Handelian. The latest recital of Leo Ornstein’s which I heard
made me realize that even the extreme modern music evidently protrudes
no great perplexities into my ears. They accept it all, a good deal of
it with avidity, some with the real tribute of astonishment which goes
only to genius.

On the whole, I think, I should have found it impossible to write
this article which, with a new light shining on my paper, is dancing
from under my darting typewriter keys, if I had not stumbled by
good luck into the camp of the enemy. For I find misunderstanding,
lack of sympathy, and enmity towards the new music to a certain
degree inspirational. These qualities, projected, have crystallized
impressions in my mind, which might, under other circumstances, have
remained vague and, in a sense, I think I may make bold to say, they
have made it possible for me to synthesize to a greater degree than has
hitherto been attempted, the various stimuli and progressive gestures
of modern music. I can more clearly say now _why_ I like it. (If I were
to tell others how to like it I should be forced to resort to a single
sentence: “Open your ears”.)

A good deal of this new insight has come to me through assiduous
perusal of Mr. Richard Aldrich’s comment on musical doings in the
columns of the “New York Times.” Mr. Aldrich, like many another,
has been bewildered and annoyed by a good deal of the modern music
played (Heaven knows that there is little enough modern music played
in New York. Up to date [April 16, 1916] there has been nothing of
Arnold Schoenberg performed this season later than his _Pelléas
und Mélisande_ and his _Kammersymphonie_; of Strawinsky--aside
from the three slight pieces for string quartet--nothing later than
_Petrouchka_. Such new works as John Alden Carpenter’s _Adventures in
a Perambulator_ and Enrique Granados’s _Goyescas_--as an opera--do not
seriously overtax the critical ear) but he has done more than some
others by way of expressing the causes of this bewilderment and this
annoyance. Some critics neglect the subject altogether but Mr. Aldrich
at least attempts to be explanatory. My first excerpt from his writings
is clipped from an article in the “New York Times” of December 5, 1915,
devoted to the string quartet music of Strawinsky, performed by the
Flonzaleys at Æolian Hall in New York on the evening of November 30:

“So far as this particular type of ‘futurist’ music is concerned it
seems to be conditioned on an accompaniment of something else to
explain it from beginning to end.”

Is this a reproach? The context would seem to indicate that it is.
If so it seems a late date in which to hurl anathema at programme
music. One would have fancied that that battle had already been fought
and won by Ernest Newman, Frederick Niecks, and Lawrence Gilman, to
name a few of the gladiators for the cause. Why Mr. Aldrich, having
swallowed whole, so to speak, the tendency of music during a century
of its development, should suddenly balk at music which requires
explanation I cannot imagine. However, this would seem to be the point
he makes in face of the fact that at least two-thirds of a symphony
society’s programme is made up of programme music. Berlioz said in the
preface to his _Symphonie Fantastique_, “The plan of an instrumental
drama, being without words, requires to be explained beforehand. The
programme (which is indispensable to the perfect comprehension of the
dramatic plan of the work) ought therefor to be considered in the
light of the spoken text of an opera, serving to ... indicate the
character and expression.” Ernest Newman built up an elaborate theory
on these two sentences, a theory fully expounded in an article called
“Programme Music” published in “Music Studies” (1905), and touched
on elsewhere in his work (at some length, of course, in his “Richard
Strauss.”) He brings out the facts. Representation of natural sounds,
emotions, and even objects--or attempts at it--in early music were not
rare. He cites the justly famous _Bible Sonatas_ of Kuhnau, Rameau’s
_Sighs_ and _Tender Plants_, Dittersdorf’s twelve programme symphonies
illustrating Ovid’s _Metamorphoses_, and John Sebastian Bach’s
_Capriccio on the Departure of my Dearly Beloved Brother_. Beethoven
wrote a _Pastoral Symphony_ in which he attempted to imitate the sound
of a brook and the call of a cuckoo. There is also a storm in this
symphony. The fact that Beethoven denied any intention of portraying
anything but “pure emotion” in this symphony is evasion and humbug as
Newman very clearly points out. From what do these emotions arise?
The answer is, From the contemplation of country scenes. The auditor
without a programme will not find the symphony so enjoyable as the
one who _knows_ what awakened the emotions in the composer. Beethoven
wrote a “battle” symphony too, a particularly bad one, I believe (I
have never seen it announced for performance). It is true, however,
that most of the composers of the “great” period were content to number
their symphonies and to call their piano pieces impromptus, sonatas,
valses, and nocturnes. Nous avons changé tout cela. Schumann was one
of the first of the composers of the nineteenth century to write music
with titles. In the _Carneval_, for example, each piece is explained
by its title. And explanations, or shadows of explanations (Cathedral,
Rhenish, Spring, etc.), hover about the four symphonies. Berlioz,
of course, carried the principle of programme music to a degree that
was considered absurd in his own time. He wrote symphonies like the
_Romeo and Juliet_ and the _Fantastique_ which had to be “explained
from beginning to end.” Liszt invented the symphonic poem and composed
pieces which are only to be listened to after one has read the poem or
seen the picture which they describe. Richard Strauss rounded out the
form and put the most elaborate naturalistic details into such works as
_Don Quixote_ and _Till Eulenspiegel_. Understanding of this music and
complete enjoyment of it rely in a large measure on the “explanation.”
The _Symphonia Domestica_ and _Heldenleben_ are extreme examples of
this sort of thing. What does Wagner’s whole system depend on but
“explanation”? How does one know that a certain sequence of notes
represents a sword? Because the composer tells us so. How does one
discover that another sequence of notes represents Alberich’s curse?
Through the same channel. Bernard Shaw says in _The Perfect Wagnerite_:
“To be able to follow the music of _The Ring_, all that is necessary
is to become familiar enough with the brief musical phrases out of
which it is built to recognize them and attach a certain definite
significance to them, exactly as any ordinary Englishman recognizes
and attaches a definite significance to the opening bars of _God Save
the Queen_.” Modern music is full of this sort of thing. It leans more
and more heavily on titles, on mimed drama, on “explanation.” Think of
almost all the music of Debussy, for example, _La Mer_, _l’Après-midi
d’un Faune_, _Iberia_, nearly all the piano music; Rimsky-Korsakow’s
_Scheherazade_, _Antar_, and _Sadko_ (the symphonic suite, not the
opera); Vincent d’Indy’s _Istar_; Borodine’s _Thamar_; Dukas’s
_l’Apprenti Sorcier_; Franck’s _Le Chasseur Maudit_ and _Les Eolides_;
Saint-Saëns’s _Phaëton_, _La Jeunesse d’Hercule_, and _Le Rouet
d’Omphale_; Busoni’s music for _Turandot_: the list is endless and it
is futile to continue it.

But, Mr. Aldrich would object, in most of these instances the music
stands by itself and it is possible to enjoy it without reference to
the titles. I contend that this is just as true of Strawinsky’s three
pieces for string quartet (of course one never will be sure because
Daniel Gregory Mason explained these pieces before they were played).
However Mr. Newman has already exploded a good many bombs about this
particular point and he has shown the fallacy of the theory. Mr.
Newman concedes that a work such as Tschaikowsky’s overture _Romeo
and Juliet_, would undoubtedly “give intense pleasure to any one who
listened to it as a piece of music, pure and simple. But I deny,”
he continues, “that this hearer would receive as much pleasure from
the work as I do. He might think the passage for muted strings, for
example, extremely beautiful, but he would not get from it such
delight as I, who not only feel all the _musical_ loveliness of the
melody and the harmonies and the tone colour, but see the lovers on
the balcony and breathe the very atmosphere of Shakespeare’s scene.
I am richer than my fellow by two or three emotions of this kind. My
nature is stirred on two or three sides instead of only one. I would
go further and say that not only does the auditor I have supposed
get less pleasure from the work than I, but he really does not hear
Tschaikowsky’s work at all. If the musician writes music to a play
and invents phrases to symbolize the characters and to picture the
events of the play, we are simply not listening to _his_ work at all
if we listen to it in ignorance of his poetical scheme. We may hear
the music but it is not the music he meant us to hear.” And Mr. Newman
goes on to berate Strauss for not providing programmes for some of his
tone-poems (programmes, however, which have always been provided by
somebody in authority at the eleventh hour). Niecks thinks that nearly
all music has an implied programme: “My opinion is that whenever the
composer ceases to write purely formal music he passes from the domain
of absolute music into that of programme music.” (“Programme Music in
the Last Four Centuries.”) But Niecks does not hold that explanation is
always necessary, even if there is a programme.

Under the circumstances it seems a bit thick to jump on Strawinsky for
writing music which has to be explained. Such pieces as _Fireworks_
or the _Scherzo Fantastique_ need no more extended explanation than
the titles give them. His three pieces for string quartet were listed
without programme at the Flonzaley concert and might have been played
that way, I think, without causing the heavens to fall. But Strawinsky
had told some one that their general title was _Grotesques_ and that
he had composed each of them with a programme in mind, which was
divulged. When the music was played, in the circumstances, what he
was driving at was as plain as A. B. C. There was no further demand
made on the auditor than that he prepare himself, as Schumann asked
auditors to prepare themselves to listen to the _Carneval_, by thinking
of the titles. In Strawinsky’s opera, _The Nightingale_, the text
of the opera serves as the programme. There are no representative
themes; there is no “working-out.” You are not required to remember
_leit-motive_ in order to familiarize your emotions with the proper
capers to cut at particular moments when these _motive_ are repeated.
You are asked simply to follow the course of the lyric drama with open
ears, open mind, and open heart. Albert Gleizes, the post-impressionist
painter, once told me that he considered the title an essential part
of a picture. “It is a _point de départ_,” he said. “In painting a
picture I always have some idea or object in mind in the beginning. In
my completed picture I may have wandered far away from this. Now the
title gives the spectator the advantage of starting where I started.”
A title to a musical composition gives an auditor a similar advantage.
No doubt Strawinsky’s _Fireworks_ would make a nice blaze without the
name but the title gives us a picture to begin with, just as Wagner
gives us scenery and text and action (to say nothing of a handbook of
representative themes) to explain the music of _Die Walküre_....

An important point has been overlooked by those who have watched
painting and music develop during the past century: while painting
has become less and less an attempt to represent nature, music has
more and more attempted concrete representation. There has seemed, at
times, to be an interchange in progress in the values of the arts.
(“He [Cézanne] is the first of the great painters to treat colour
deliberately as music; he tests all its harmonic resources,” Romain
Rolland.) Observers of matters æsthetic have frequently told us that
both of these arts were breaking with their old principles and going
on to something new but, it would seem, they have failed to grasp the
significance of the change. Music, as it drops its classic outline
and form, the _cliché_ of the studio and the academy, becomes more
and more like nature, because natural sounds are not co-ordinated
into symphonies with working-out sections and codas, first and second
subjects, etc., while in painting, in some of its later manifestations,
the resemblance to things seen has entirely disappeared. This fact, at
least one phase of it, was realized in concrete form by the futurists
in Italy who asserted that polyphony, fugue, etc., were contraptions of
a bygone age when the stage-coach was in vogue. Machinery has changed
the world. We are living in a dynasty of dynamics. A certain number
of futurists even give concerts of noise machines in which a definite
attempt is made to imitate the sounds of automobiles, aeroplanes, etc.
At a concert given at the Dal Verme in Milan, for example, the pieces
were called _The Awakening of a Great City_, _A Dinner on the Kursaal
Terrace_ (doubtless with an imitation of the guests eating soup), and
_A Meet of Automobiles and Aeroplanes_.

Picasso and Picabia have made us acquainted with a form of art which
in its vague realization of representative values becomes almost as
abstract an art as music was in the time of Beethoven, while such
musicians as Strauss, Debussy, and Strawinsky, have gradually widened
the boundaries which have confined music, and have made it at times
something very concrete. Debussy’s _La Mer_, for example, is a much
more definite picture (in leaning over the rail of the gallery of the
Salle Gaveau in Paris during a performance of this piece I actually
became sea-sick!) than Marcel Duchamp’s painting of the _Nu Descendant
l’Escalier_. So Strawinsky’s three pieces for string quartet represent
certain things in nature (the first a group of peasants playing strange
instruments on the steppes; the second sounds in a Cathedral heard by
a drowsy worshipper, the responses of the priest, chanted out of key,
the shrill antiphonal choruses; and the third a juggling Pierrot with
a soul-pain) much more definitely than Picasso’s latest _Nature Morte
dans un Jardin_.

“Now the law which has dominated painting for more than a century is
a more and more comprehensive assimilation of musical idiom. Even
Delacroix spoke of ‘the mysterious effects of line and colour which,
alas, only a few adepts feel--like interwoven themes in music ...’
and Baudelaire, in another connection, wrote, ‘Harmony, melody, and
counterpoint are to be found in colour.’ Ingres also remarked to his
disciples, ‘If I could make you all musicians you would be better
painters.’ Renoir, who journeyed to Sicily to paint Wagner’s portrait
and to translate _Tannhäuser_, is a musical enthusiast and his work
is music. Maurice Denis tells us that his pals at Julian’s Academy,
those who were to found synthesism with him, never tired of discussing
Lamoureux’s concerts, where they were enthusiastic habitués. Gaugin
announced that ‘painting is a musical phase.’ He speaks continually of
the music of a picture; when he wants to analyze his work he divides
it into the literary element, to which he attaches less importance,
and the musical element which he schemes first. Cézanne, whom Gaugin
compared to César Franck, said, ‘not model, but modulate.’ Metzinger
invokes the right of cubist painters to express all emotions as music
does, and one of the æstheticians of the new school writes: ‘The goal
of painting is perhaps a music of nature, visual music to which
traditional painting would have somewhat the status that sacred or
dramatic music has compared to concert music.’

“This, then, is the revolution in the art of line and colour which has
become aware of its intrinsic power, independent of any subject. In
truth, even among the Venetians, as has been well said, the subject
was ‘only the background upon which the painter relied to develop his
harmonies,’ but the mentality of spectators clings to this background
as to the libretto of an opera. At present, an end to librettos: Pure
music: those who wish to comprehend it must first of all master its
idiom, for ‘Colour is learned as music is.’” (Romain Rolland: “The
Unbroken Chain,” Lee Simonson’s translation.)

So far, in spite of the protestations of horror made by the
academicians, the pedants, and the Philistines, which would lead one
to suppose a state of complete chaos, there has not been a complete
abandonment of co-ordination, of selection, or of intention, in either
art. In fact, it seems to me, that the qualities of intention and
selection are more powerful adjuncts of the artist than they have
been for many generations. In painting colour and form are cunningly
contrived to give us an idea, if not a photograph, and in music
natural (as well as unnatural) sounds are still arranged, perhaps to a
more extreme extent than ever before.


II

I wonder if all the suggestion music gives us is associative. Sometimes
I think so. Was it Berlioz who remarked that the slightest quickening
of _tempo_ would transform the celebrated air in _Orphée_ from “_J’ai
perdu mon Euridice_” to “_J’ai trouvé mon Euridice_”? Rossini found an
overture which he had formerly used for a tragedy quite suitable for
_Il Barbiere di Siviglia_, and the interchangeable values which Handel
gave to secular and sacred tunes are familiar to all music students.
Are minor keys really sad? Are major keys always suggestive of joy? We
know that this is not true although one will be more sure of a ready
response of tears from a Western audience by resorting to a minor key.
In our music wedding marches are usually in the major and funeral
marches usually in the minor modes. But almost all Eastern music is in
a minor key, love songs and even cradle songs. Recall, or play over on
your piano, the Smyrnan lullaby (made familiar by Mme. Sembrich) which
occurs in the collection of Grecian and oriental melodies edited by
L. A. Bourgault-Ducoudray.... Even the composers who do not call their
pieces by name and who scorn the use of a programme, depend for some of
their most powerful effects on emotion created by association ... and
a new composer, be he indefatigable enough, can rouse new associations
in us.... Why if three or four composers would meet together and decide
that the use of a certain group of notes stood for the town pump, in
time it would be quite easy for other composers to use this phrase in
that connection _with no explanation whatever_.


III

“It is a mistake of much popular criticism,” says Walter Pater, in the
first two sentences of his essay on “The School of Giorgione,” “to
regard poetry, music, and painting--all the various products of art--as
but translations into different languages of one and the same fixed
quantity of imaginative thought, supplemented by certain technical
qualities of colour, in painting; of sound, in music; of rhythmical
words, in poetry. In this way, the sensuous element in art, and with
it almost everything in art that is essentially artistic, is made a
matter of indifference; and a clear apprehension of the opposite
principle--that the sensuous material of each art brings with it a
special phase or quality of beauty, untranslatable into the forms of
any other, an order of impressions distinct in kind--is the beginning
of all true æsthetic criticism.”

Strawinsky, in a sense, is quite done with programme music; at least
he says that this is so. “La musique est trop bête pour exprimer autre
chose que la musique” is his pregnant phrase, which I cannot quote
often enough. And in an interview with Stanley Wise, which appeared
in the columns of the “New York Tribune” he further says, “Programme
music ... has been obviously discontinued as being distinctly an
uncouth form which already has had its day; but music, nevertheless,
still drags out its life in accordance with these false notions and
conceptions. Without absolutely defying the programme, musicians still
draw upon sources foreign to their art.... The true inwardness of
music being purely acoustic, the art so expresses itself without being
concerned with feelings alien to its nature.... Music in the theatre
is still held in bondage to other elements. Wagner, in particular, is
responsible for this servitude in which music labours to-day.”

The greater part of Igor Strawinsky’s music, up to date, is written
to a programme, but these remarks of the composer should not be
incomprehensible on that account. Somewhat later than the performance
of the three pieces for string quartet, _The Firebird_ and _Petrouchka_
were performed in New York and were hailed by the critics, _en masse_,
as most delightful works. But the music depends for its success, they
said, on the stage action to explain it. I fancy this is true of many
operas which were written for the stage. _Siegfried_, as a whole, would
be pretty tiresome in concert form and so would _La Fille du Regiment_.
And read what Henry Fothergill Chorley has to say about the works of
Gluck (“Modern German Music”): “The most experienced and imaginative of
readers will derive from the closest perusal of the scores of Gluck’s
operas, feeble and distant impressions of their power and beauty.
The delicious charm of Mozart’s melody--the expressive nobility of
Handel’s ideas--may in some measure be comprehended by the student at
the pianoforte and the eye may assure the reader how masterly is the
symmetry of the vocal score with one,--how rich and complete is the
management of the instrumental score, with the other master. But this
is in no respect the case with _Alceste_, the two _Iphigénies_ and
_Armide_--it may be added, with almost any opera written according to
the canons of French taste. That which appears thin, bald, severe,
when it is merely perused, is filled up, brightens, enchants, excites,
and satisfies, when it is heard with action,--to a degree only to be
believed upon experience. Out of the theatre, three-fourths of Gluck’s
individual merit is lost. He wrote for the stage.” That all this is
true any one who, like me, has taken the trouble to study the scores of
the Gluck operas, which are infrequently performed, may have discovered
for himself. I have never heard _Alceste_ and that lyric drama, as a
result, has never sprung to me from the printed page as do the notes of
_Orphée_, _Armide_, and _Iphigénie en Tauride_. I am convinced of the
depth of expression contained in its pages; I am certain of its noble
power, but only because I have had a similar experience with other
Gluck music dramas, with which I have later become acquainted in the
theatre.

This theory in regard to _Petrouchka_ and _The Firebird_ may be easily
contradicted, however. One listener told me that she got the complete
picture of the Russian fair by closing her eyes; it was all in the
music. The action, as a matter of fact, she added, annoyed her. It is
quite certain that the music of either of these works is delightful
when played on the piano; an average roomful of people who like to
listen to music will be charmed with it. _The Sacrifice to the Spring_
was hissed intolerantly when it was performed as a ballet in Paris
but, later (April 5, 1914), when Pierre Monteux gave an orchestral
performance of the work at a concert it was applauded as violently.

Strawinsky has, it is true, worked away from _representation_ (in the
sense of copying nature or, like Wagner, relying on literary formulas
for his effects) in his music, but he has written very little that does
not depend on a programme, either expressed or implied. All songs of
course are “explained” by their lyrics. The _Scherzo Fantastique_ and
_Fireworks_ are programme music in the lighter sense, and naturally
the music of his ballets and his opera depends for its meaning on the
stage action. What Strawinsky means to do, I think--certainly what
he has done--is to avoid going outside his subject or requiring his
listener to do so. To understand the music of his opera you need never
have heard a real nightingale sing, for the bird does not sing at all
like a nightingale, a fact which was not understood by the critics
when the work was first produced, and in _The Sacrifice to the Spring_
you will find no attempt made to ape natural sounds, although there
was ample opportunity for doing so.... Another modern worker in tone,
Leo Ornstein, in the accompaniment to his cradle song (it is the same
_wiegenlied_ set by Richard Strauss, by the way) tries to give his
hearers the mother’s overtones, her thoughts about the child’s future,
etc.; the music, instead of attempting to express the exact meaning of
the poem, expresses _more_ than the poem.

And Mr. Ornstein once said to me, “What I try to do in composing
is to get underneath, to express the feeling underneath--not to be
photographic. I do not think it is art to reproduce a steam whistle but
it is art to give the feeling that the steam whistle gives us. That
can never be done by exact reproduction.... I should not like a steam
whistle introduced into the concert room” (I had shamelessly suggested
it) “... but great, smashing chords....”

Yet Mr. Ornstein in his _Impressions of the Thames_ is as near
actual representation as Whistler or Monet ... certainly a musical
impressionist.

Is anything true? I hope not. At dinner the other evening a lady
attempted to prove to me that there were standards by which beauty
could be judged and rules by which it could be constructed. She was
unsuccessful.


IV

It has occurred to me that Mr. Aldrich meant that he wanted the
juxtaposition of notes explained from beginning to end. Inspiration
is not always conscious ... one feels in the end whether such a
collocation is inevitable or not ... I wonder if Beethoven could have
explained one of his last quartets or piano sonatas. I doubt it. Of
course, on the other hand, Wagner explained and explained and explained.


V

I am afraid that this quality alone, the fact that the music needs
explanation, is not the rock on which Mr. Aldrich splits, so to speak.
He writes somewhere else in this same article: “All he asks of his
listeners is to forget all they know about string quartet music.” Now
this is really too much. That is exactly what Strawinsky does, and
why shouldn’t he? Has not every great composer done as much? To quote
Ernest Newman again (this time from his book “Richard Strauss”), “All
the music of the giants of the past expresses no more than a fragment
of what music can and some day will express. With each new generation
it must discover and reveal some new secret of the universe and of
man’s heart; and as the thing uttered varies, the way of uttering it
must vary also. There is only one rational definition of good ‘form’
in music--that which expresses most succinctly and most perfectly the
state of soul in which the idea originated; and as moods and ideas
change, so must forms.” “The true creator strives, in reality, after
_perfection_ only,” writes Busoni, in “A New Æsthetic of Music,” “and
through bringing this into harmony with _his own_ individuality, a new
law arises without premeditation.” The very greatness of Beethoven is
due to the fact that he made a perfect wedding of form and idea. His
forms (in which he broke with tradition in several important points)
were evolved out of his ideas. Now the very writers who give Beethoven
the credit for having accomplished this successful revolution and who
write enthusiastically of Gluck’s “reform of the opera,” object to any
contemporary instances of this spirit (Maurice Ravel “corrects” with
great care, I am told, the exercises of his pupils. “He who breaks
rules must first know them,” he says. And I have no disposition to
quarrel with this sort of reverence although I think it is sometimes
carried too far. However the critic attempts to “correct” the finished
pupil’s work, from the work of the past--a sad and impossible task).
Why in the name of goodness should not Strawinsky, or any other modern
composer, for that matter, be allowed to make us forget everything
we know about string quartets, if he is able? Some of us would be
grateful for the sensation. Leo Ornstein in a recent article said,
“The very first step which the composer must be given the privilege of
insisting upon is that his listeners should approach his work with no
preconceived notions of any kind; they must learn to allow absolute
and full freedom to their imaginations as it is only under such
circumstances that any new work can be understood and appreciated at
first. All preconceived theories must be abolished, and the new work
approached through no formulas.” And in the same article Mr. Ornstein
relates how, after he had played his _Wild Men’s Dance_ to Leschetizky
that worthy pedagogue murmured, amazed, “How in the world did you
get all those notes on paper!” That, unfortunately, concludes Mr.
Ornstein, is the attitude of the average listener to modern music. A
similar instance is related in the case of Strawinsky. He played some
measures of his ballet, _The Firebird_, on the piano to his master,
Rimsky-Korsakow, until the composer of _Scheherazade_ interposed, “Stop
playing that horrid thing; otherwise I might begin to enjoy it.” And
even the usually open-minded James Huneker says in his essay on Arnold
Schoenberg (“Ivory, Apes, and Peacocks”), “If such music-making is ever
to become accepted, then I long for Death the Releaser. More shocking
still would be the suspicion that in time I might be persuaded to like
this music, to embrace, after abhorring it.” These phrases of Huneker’s
remind me of a personal incident. My father has subscribed for the
“Atlantic Monthly” since the first issue and one of the earliest
memories of my childhood is connected with the inevitable copy which
always lay on the library table. On one occasion, contemplating it, I
burst into tears; nor could I be comforted. My explanation, between
sobs, was, “Some day I’ll grow up and like a magazine without pictures!
I can’t bear to think of it!” Well, there is many a man who weeps
because some day he may grow up to like music without melody! Music
_has_ changed; of that there can be no doubt. Don’t go to a concert
and expect to hear what you might have heard fifty years ago; don’t
expect _anything_ and don’t hate yourself if you happen to like what
you hear. Mr. George Moore’s evidence on this point of receptiveness
is enlightening (Mr. George Moore who spoke to me once of the “vulgar
noises made by the Russian Ballet”): “In _Petrouchka_ the orchestra all
began playing in different keys and when it came out into one key I was
quite dazed. I don’t know whether it is music but I rather liked it!”

Still another point is raised by Mr. Aldrich. I quote from the “New
York Times” of December 8, 1915; the reference is to the second string
quartet of David Stanley Smith, played by the Kneisel Quartet (the
italics are mine): “Mr. Smith does not hesitate at drastic dissonance
_when it results from the leading of his part writing_.” There at last
we have the real nigger in the woodpile. The relation between keys is
so remote, the tonalities are so inexplicable in a modern Strawinsky
or Schoenberg work that the brain, prepared with a list of scales,
refuses to take in the natural impression that the ear receives.
This sort of criticism reminds me of a line which is quoted from
some London journal by William Wallace in “The Threshold of Music,”
“The whole work is singularly lacking in contrapuntal interest and
depends solely for such effect as it achieves upon certain emotional
impressions of harmony and colour.” And, nearer home, I culled the
following from the “New York Sun” of December 12, 1915 (Mr. W. J.
Henderson’s column), “This is what is the matter with the futurists
or post-impressionists in music. They are tone colourists and that is
all.” (Amusingly enough Mr. Henderson begins his remarks by praising
Joseph Pennell for writing an article in which the post-impressionist
painters were given a drubbing; this article is treated with contumely
and scorn by the art critic of the “Sun” on the page opposite that on
which Mr. Henderson’s article appears.) In all these cases you find men
complaining because a composer has done exactly what he started out to
do. F. Balilla Pratella in one of his futurist manifestos discusses
this point (the translation is my own), “The fugue, a composition
based on counterpoint par excellence, is full of (such) artifices even
when it achieves its artistic balance in the works of the great German
Sebastian Bach. Soul, intellectuality, and instinct are here fused in a
given form, in a given manifestation of art, an art of its own times,
historical and strictly connected with the life, faith, and culture of
that particular period. Why then should we be compelled or asked to
live it over again at the distance of several centuries?” And later,
“We proclaim as an essential principle of our futurist revolution
that counterpoint and fugue, stupidly considered as one of the most
important branches of musical learning, are in our eyes only the ruins
of the old science of polyphony which extends from the Flemish school
to Bach. We replace them by harmonic polyphony, logical fusion of
counterpoint and harmony, which allows musicians to escape the needless
difficulty of dividing their efforts in two opposing cultures, one
dead and the other contemporary, and entirely irreconcilable, because
they are the fruits of two different sensibilities.” To quote Busoni;
again: “How important, indeed, are ‘Third,’ ‘Fifth,’ and ‘Octave’!
How strictly we divide ‘consonances’ from ‘dissonances’--_in a sphere
where no dissonances can possibly exist_!” When Bernard Shaw published
“The Perfect Wagnerite” he wrote for a public which still considered
Wagner a little in advance of the contemporary in music. What did he
say? “My second encouragement is addressed to modest citizens who may
suppose themselves to be disqualified from enjoying _The Ring_ by their
technical ignorance of music. They may dismiss all such misgivings
speedily and confidently. If the sound of music has any power to move
them they will find that Wagner exacts nothing further. There is
not a single bar of ‘classical music’ in _The Ring_--not a note in
it that has any other point than the single direct point of giving
musical expression to the drama. In classical music there are, as the
analytical programmes tell us, first subjects and second subjects,
free fantasias, recapitulations, and codas; there are fugues, with
counter-subjects, strettos, and pedal points; there are passacaglias on
ground basses, canons and hypodiapente, and other ingenuities, which
have, after all, stood or fallen by their prettiness as much as the
simplest folk-tune. Wagner is never driving at anything of this sort
any more than Shakespeare in his plays is driving at such ingenuities
of verse-making as sonnets, triolets, and the like. And this is why he
is so easy for the natural musician who has had no academic teaching.
The professors, when Wagner’s music is played to them, exclaim at
once, ‘What is this? Is it aria, or recitative? Is there no cabeletta
to it--not even a full close? Why was that discord not prepared; and
why does he not resolve it correctly? How dare he indulge in those
scandalous and illicit transitions into a key that has not one note in
common with the key he has just left? Listen to those false relations.
What does he want with six drums and eight horns when Mozart worked
miracles with two of each? The man is no musician.’ The layman neither
knows nor cares about any of these things. It is the adept musician
of the old school who has everything to unlearn; and I leave him,
unpitied, to his fate.” All Wagner asked his contemporaries to do, in
fact, was to forget all they knew about opera!


VI

This piling up of Shaw on Huneker, these dips into Newman and Niecks,
are beginning to be formidable, but one never knows what turn of the
road may lead the traveller to his promised land and it is better to
draw the map clearly even if there be a confusion of choices. And so,
just here, I beg leave to make a tiny digression, to point out that
the new music is not so terrible as all this explanation may have
made it seem to be. Granville Bantock talks learnedly of “horizontal
counterpoint” but his music is perfectly comprehensible. Schoenberg
writes of “passing notes,” says there is no such thing as consonance
and dissonance, and “I have not been able to discover any principles
of harmony. Sincerity, self-expression, is all that the artist needs,
and he should say only what he must say” but Mr. Huneker points out
that he has founded an order out of his chaos, “that his madness is
very methodical. For one thing he abuses the interval of the fourth and
he enjoys juggling with the chord of the ninth. Vagabond harmonies,
in which the remotest keys lovingly hold hands do not prevent the
sensation of a central tonality somewhere--in the cellar, on the
roof, in the gutter, up in the sky.” Percy Grainger says he dreams of
“beatless” music without rhythm--at least academically speaking--but
he certainly does not write it. F. Balilla Pratella writes pages
condemning dance rhythms and still more pages elaborating a new theory
for marking time (which, I admit, is absolutely incomprehensible to me)
and publishes them as a preface to his _Musica Futurista_ (Bologna,
1912), a composition for orchestra, which is written, in spite of the
theories, and the fantastic time signatures, in the most engaging
dance rhythms. Nor does his disregard for fugue go so far as to make
him unfriendly to scale; the whole-tone scale prevails in this work.
His dislike for polyphony seems more sincere; there is a great deal of
homophonous effect. Leo Ornstein has admitted to me that his “system”
would be fully understood in a decade or two. As for Strawinsky
... how the public joyfully and rapturously takes to its heart his
dissonances, and even asks for more!


VII

Vincent d’Indy, reported by Marcel Duchamp, said recently that the
philosophy of music is twenty years behind that of the other arts.


VIII

The fact that Schoenberg has written a handbook of theory, explaining,
after a fashion, his method of composition has misled some people.
“Schoenberg is a learned musician,” writes Mr. Aldrich (“New York
Times,” December 5, 1915), “and his music is built up by processes
derived from methods handed down to the present by the learned of
the past, however widely the results may depart from those hitherto
accepted.... There results what he chooses to consider ‘harmony,’ the
outcome of a deliberate system, about which he theorizes and _has
written a book_” (the italics again are mine). Against this train of
reasoning (further on in the same article it becomes evident that Mr.
Aldrich is annoyed with Strawinsky because he has not done likewise)
it is pleasant to place the following paragraph from Chorley’s “Modern
German Music”: “Mozart, it will be recollected, totally and (for him)
seriously, declined to criticize himself and confess his habits of
composition. Many men have produced great works of art who have never
cultivated æsthetic conversation: nay, more, who have shrunk with a
secretly entertained dislike from those indefatigable persons whose
fancy it is ‘to peep and botanize’ in every corner of faëry land. It
cannot be said that the analytical spirit of the circle of Weimar, when
Goethe was its master-spirit did any great things for Music.” Do not
misunderstand Strawinsky’s silence (which has only been relative, after
all). It is sometimes as well to compose as to theorize. Some of the
great composers have let us see into their workshops (not that they
have all consistently followed out their own theories) and others have
not. In one pregnant paragraph Strawinsky has expressed himself (he is
speaking of _The Nightingale_): “I want to suggest neither situations
nor emotions, but simply to manifest, to express them. I think there is
in what are called ‘impressionist’ methods” (“Mr. Strawinsky, on the
other hand, is a musical impressionist from the start”: R. A. again) “a
certain amount of hypocrisy, or at least a tendency towards vagueness
and ambiguity. That I shun above all things, and that, perhaps, is the
reason why my methods differ as much from those of the impressionists
as they differ from academic conventional methods. Though I often find
it extremely hard to do so, I always aim at straightforward expression
in its simplest form. I have no use for ‘working-out’ in dramatic or
lyric music. The one essential thing is to feel and to convey one’s
feelings.”

This idea of natural expression becomes associated in any great
composer’s mind with another idea, the horror of the _cliché_. Each new
giant desires to express himself without resorting to the thousand and
one formulas which have been more or less in use since the “golden age”
of music (whenever that was). Natural expression implies to a certain
extent the abandonment of the _cliché_, for, under this principle,
if a rule or a habit is weighed and found wanting it is immediately
discarded.

“Routine (_cliché_) is highly esteemed and frequently required; in
musical ‘officialdom’ it is a _sine qua non_,” writes Busoni. “That
routine in music should exist at all, and furthermore that it can
be nominated as a condition in the musician’s bond, is another
proof of the narrow confines of our musical art. Routine signifies
the acquisition of a modicum of experience and art craft, and their
application to all cases which may occur; hence, there must be an
astounding number of analogous cases. Now I like to imagine a species
of art-praxis wherein each case should be a new one, an exception.”
Even so early a composer (using early in a loose sense) as Schumann
found it unnecessary, at times, to close a piece with the tonic;
and many other composers have disregarded the rule since, leaving
the ear hanging in the air, so to speak. Is there any more reason
why all pieces should end on the tonic than that all books should
end happily or all pictures be painted in black and white? In music
which Mozart wrote at the age of four there are chords of the second
(and they occur in music before Mozart). In books of the period
you can read of the horror with which ears at the beginning of the
nineteenth century received consecutive fifths. Some of the modern
French composers have disposed of the _cliché_ of a symphony in four
movements. Chausson, Franck, and Dukas have written symphonies in
three parts. What composer (even the most academic) ever followed the
letter of a precept if he found a better way of expressing himself?
Moussorgsky avoided _cliché_ as he would have avoided the plague. He
took all the short cuts possible. There are no preambles and addendas,
or other doddering concessions to scientific art in his music dramas
and his songs. He gives the words their natural accent and the voice
its natural inflections. Death is not always rewarded with blows on
the big drum. The composer sometimes expresses the end, quite simply,
in silence. In all the arts the horror of _cliché_ asserts itself
so violently indeed that we find Robert Ross (“Masks and Phases”)
assailing Walter Pater for such a fall from grace as the use of the
phrase, “rebellious masses of black hair.” Of course some small souls
are so busy defying _cliché_, with no adequate reason for doing so,
that they make themselves ridiculous. And as an example of this
preoccupation I may tell an anecdote related to me by George Moore.
“For a time,” he said, “Augusta Holmès was interested in an opera she
was composing, _La Montagne Noire_, to the exclusion of all other
subjects in conversation. She talked about it constantly and always
brought one point forward: all the characters were to sing with their
backs to the audience. That was her novel idea. She did not seem to
realize that, in itself, the innovation would not serve to make her
opera interesting.” Strawinsky’s horror of _cliché_ is by no means
abnormal. He does not break rules merely for the pleasure of shocking
the pedants. In each instance he has developed, quite naturally and
inevitably, the form out of his material. In _Petrouchka_, a ballet
with a Russian country fair as its background, he has harped on the
folk-dance tunes, the hurdy-gurdy manner, and, as befits this work,
there is no great break with tradition, except in the orchestration.
_The Firebird_, too, in spite of its fantasy and brilliance, is
perfectly understandable in terms of the chromatic scale. In _The
Sacrifice to the Spring_, on the other hand, unhampered by the chains
which a “story-ballet” (the fable of these “pictures of pagan Russia”
is entirely negligible) inevitably imply, he has awakened primitive
emotions by the use of barbaric rhythm, without any special regard for
melody or harmony, using the words in their academic senses. There
is no attempt made to begin or end with major thirds. Strawinsky was
perhaps the first composer to see that melody is of no importance in a
ballet. _Fireworks_ is impressionistic but it is no more so (although
the result is arrived at by a wholly dissimilar method) than _La Mer_
of Debussy. But it is in his opera, _The Nightingale_, or his very
short pieces for string quartet, or his Japanese songs for voice and
small orchestra that the beast shows his fangs, so to speak. It is
in these pieces and in _The Sacrifice to the Spring_ that Strawinsky
has accomplished a process of elision, leaving out some of those
stupidities which have bored us at every concert of academic music
which we have attended. (You must realize how much your mind wanders
at a symphony concert. It is impossible to concentrate one’s complete
attention on the performance of a long work except at those times when
some new phrase or some new turn in the working-out of a theme strikes
the ear. There is so much of the music that is familiar, because it has
occurred in so much music before. If you hear tum-ti-tum you may be
certain it will be followed by ti-ti-ti and a good part of this sort
of thing falls on deaf ears.... There are those, I am forced to admit,
who can only concentrate on that which is perfectly familiar to them.)
As a matter of fact he gives our ears credit (by this time!) for the
ability to skip a few of the connecting links. Now this sort of elision
in painting has come to be the slogan of a school. Cézanne painted a
woman as he saw her; he made no attempt to explain her; that pleasure
he left for the spectator of his picture. He did not draw a fashion
plate. The successors of Cézanne (some of them) have gone much farther.
They draw us a few bones and expect us to reconstruct the woman, body
and soul, after the fashion of a professor of anatomy reconstructing an
ichthyosaurus. Strawinsky and some other modern musicians have gone as
far; they have left out the tum-ti-tums and twilly-wigs which connect
the pregnant phrases in their music.... This does not signify that they
do not _think_ them, sometimes, but it is not necessary for any one
with a receptive ear (not an _expectant_ ear, unless it be an ear which
expects to hear something pleasant!) to do so. In fact this kind of an
auditor appreciates these short cuts of composers, gives thanks to God
for them. Surprise is one of the keenest emotions that music has in its
power to give us (even Hadyn and Weber discovered that!). It is only
the pedants and the critics, who, after all, do not sit through all the
long symphonies, who are annoyed by these attempts at concentration and
condensation. (I say the pedants but I must include the Philistines.
It is really _cliché_ which makes certain music “popular.” The public
as a whole really prefers music based on _cliché_, with a melody in
which the end is foreordained almost from the first bar. Of course in
time public taste is changed.... The transition is slow ... but the
composer who follows public taste instead of leading it soon drops out
of hearing. The _cliché_ of to-day is not the _cliché_ of day before
yesterday. According to Philip Hale, Napoleon, then first consul [1800]
said to Luigi Cherubini, “I am very fond of Paisiello’s music; it is
gentle, peaceful. You have great talent, but your accompaniments are
too loud.” Cherubini replied, “Citizen Consul, I have conformed to the
taste of the French.” Napoleon persisted, “Your music is too loud;
let us talk of Paisiello’s which lulls me gently.” “I understand,”
answered Cherubini, “you prefer music that does not prevent you from
dreaming of affairs of state.”) Strawinsky, working gradually, not
with the intention to astonish but with no fear of doing so, dropping
superfluities, and all _cliché_ of the studio whatsoever, arrives
at a perfectly natural form of expression in his lyric drama, _The
Nightingale_, in which there is no working-out or development of
themes; the music is intended to comment upon, to fill with a bigger
meaning, the action as it proceeds, without resorting to tricks which
require mental effort on the part of the auditor. The composer does not
wish to burden him with any more mental effort than the mere listening
to the piece requires and he strikes to the soul with the poignancy of
his expression. (The foregoing may easily be misunderstood. It does not
mean necessarily that there is no polyphony, that there are no parts
leading hither and thither in the music of Strawinsky. It does not
mean that dissonance has become an end in itself with this composer.
It simply means that he has let his inspiration take the form natural
to it and has not tried to cramp his inspiration into proscribed
forms. There should be no more difficulty in understanding him than in
understanding Beethoven once one arrives at listening with unbiased
ears. The trouble is that too many of us have made up our minds not
to listen to anything which does not conform with our own precious
opinions.)

At the risk of being misunderstood by some and for the sake of making
myself clearer to others I hazard a frivolous figure. Say that
Wagner’s formula for composition be represented by some expression;
I will choose the simple proverb, “Make hay while the sun shines.”
Humperdinck is content to change a single detail of this formula. He
says, musically speaking, “Make _wheat_ while the sun shines.” Richard
Strauss makes a more complete inversion. His paraphrase would suggest
something like this, “Make brass while the band brays.” Strawinsky,
wearied of the whole business (as was Debussy before him; genius does
not paraphrase) uses only two words of the formula ... say “make” and
“sun.” Later even these are negligible, as each new composer makes his
own laws and his own formulas. The infinity of it! In time the work of
Strawinsky will establish a _cliché_ to be scorned by a new generation
(scorned in the sense that it will not be imitated, except by inferior
men).

That his music is vibrant and beautiful we may be sure and it has
happened that all of it has been appreciated by a very worth-while
public. He has done what Benedetto Croce in his valuable work,
“Æsthetic,” demands of the artist. He has expressed himself ... for
beauty is expression. “Artists,” says this writer, “while making a
verbal pretence of agreeing, or yielding a feigned obedience to them,
have always disregarded (these) _laws of styles_. Every true work of
art has violated some established class and upset the ideas of the
critics who have been obliged to enlarge the number of classes, until
finally even this enlargement has proved too narrow, owing to the
appearance of new works of art, which are naturally followed by new
scandals, new upsettings, and--new enlargements.”

“It must not be forgotten,” says Egon Wellesz (“Schoenberg and Beyond”
in “The Musical Quarterly,” Otto Kinkeldey’s translation), “that in art
there are no ‘eternal laws’ and rules. Each period of history has its
own art, and the art of each period has its own rules. There are times
of which one might say that every work which was not in accord with the
rules was bad or amateurish. These are the times in which fixed forms
exist, to which all artists hold fast, merely varying the content.
Then there are periods when artists break through and shatter the old
forms. The greatness of their thoughts can no longer be confined within
the old limits. (Think of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony and the Symphonie
Fantastique of Berlioz.) There arises a category of art works whose
power and beauty can be _felt_ only and not _understood_. For this
reason an audience that knows nothing of rules will enthuse over works
of this kind much sooner than the average musician who looks for the
rules and their observance.”

Remember that Hanslick called _Tristan und Isolde_ “an abomination of
sense and language” and Chorley wrote “I have never been so blanked,
pained, wearied, _insulted_ even (the word is not too strong), by a
work of pretension as by ... _Tannhäuser_....” “Fortunately,” I quote
Benedetto Croce again, “no arduous remarks are necessary to convince
ourself that pictures, poetry, and every work of art, produce no
effects save on souls prepared to receive them.”

The clock continues to make its hands go round, so fast indeed that
it becomes increasingly difficult to keep track of its course. For
example, just before his death, John F. Runciman in “Another Ode to
Discord” (“The New Music Review,” April, 1916) seemed to present an
entirely new front. Here is a sample passage, “We have grown used to
dissonances and our ears no longer require the momentary rest afforded
by frequent concords; if a discord neither demands preparation nor
resolution, and if it sounds beautiful and is expressive, there is
no reason on earth why a piece of music should not consist wholly
of a series of discords.... From Monteverde to Scriabine the line
is unbroken, each successive generation growing bolder in attacking
dissonances and still bolder in the manner of quitting them. I heard
a gentleman give a recital of his own pianoforte works not long ago.
They seemed to consist entirely of minor seconds--B and C struck
together--and the effect to my mind was excruciatingly abominable.
But that is how Bach’s music, Beethoven’s, Wagner’s, struck their
contemporaries; and heaven knows what we shall get accustomed to in
time. One thing is certain--that the most daring modern spirit is only
following in the steps of the mightiest masters....”

We may be on the verge of a still greater revolution in art than any
through which we have yet passed; new banners may be unfurled, and new
strongholds captured. I admit that the idea gives me pleasure. Try to
admit as much to yourself. Go hear the new music; listen to it and see
if you can’t enjoy it. Perhaps you can’t. At any rate you will find in
time that you won’t listen to second-rate imitations of the giant works
of the past any longer. Your ears will make progress in spite of you
and I shouldn’t wonder at all if five years more would make Schoenberg
and Strawinsky and Ornstein a trifle old-fashioned.... The Austrian
already has a little of the academy dust upon him.


_New York, April 16, 1916._




A New Principle in Music




A New Principle in Music


Although Igor Strawinsky plainly proclaimed himself a genius in _The
Firebird_ (1909-10), it was in _Petrouchka_ (1910-11) that he began the
experiment which established a new principle in music. In these “scènes
burlesques” he discovered the advantages of a new use of the modern
orchestra, completely upsetting the old academic ideas about “balance
of tone,” and proving to his own satisfaction the value of “pure tone,”
in the same sense that the painter speaks of pure colour. And in this
work he broke away from the standards not only of Richard Strauss, the
Wagner follower, but also of such innovators as Modeste Moussorgsky and
Claude Debussy.

Strauss, following Wagner’s theory of the _leit-motiv_, rounded out
the form of the tone-poem, carried the principle of representation in
music a few steps farther than his master, gave new colours to old
instruments, and broadened the scope of the modern orchestra so that
it might include new ones (in one of his symphonies Gustav Mahler
was content with 150 men!). Moussorgsky (although his work preceded
that of Strauss, the general knowledge of it is modern), working
along entirely different lines, strove for truthful utterance and
achieved a mode of expression which usually seems inevitable. Debussy
endowed music with novel tints derived from the extensive, and almost
exclusive, use of what is called the whole-tone scale, and instead of
forcing his orchestra to make more noise he constantly repressed it (in
all of _Pelléas et Mélisande_ there is but one climax of sound and in
_l’Après-midi d’un Faune_ and his other orchestral works he is equally
continent in the use of dynamics).

Igor Strawinsky has not been deaf to the blandishments of these
composers. He has used the _leit-motiv_ (sparingly) in both _The
Firebird_ and _Petrouchka_. He abandoned it in _The Sacrifice to
the Spring_ (1913) and in _The Nightingale_ (1914). His powers of
representation are as great as those of Strauss; it is only necessary
to recall the music of the bird in _The Firebird_, his orchestral
piece, _Fireworks_, which received warm praise from a manufacturer of
pyrotechnics, and the street organ music in _Petrouchka_. Later he
conceived the mission of music to be something different. “La musique
est trop bête,” he said once ironically, “pour exprimer autre chose que
la musique.” In such an extraordinary work as _The Nightingale_ we find
him making little or no attempt at representation. The bird does not
sing like the little brown warbler; instead Strawinsky has endeavoured
to write music which would give the _feeling_ of the bird’s song and
the effect it made on the people in his lyric drama to the auditors
in the stalls of the opera house. As for Strauss’s use of orchestral
colour the German is the merest tyro when compared to the Russian.
There is some use of the whole-tone scale in _The Firebird_, and
elsewhere in Strawinsky, but it is not a predominant use of it. In this
“conte dansé” he also suggests the _Pelléas et Mélisande_ of Debussy
in his continent use of sound and the mystery and esotericism of his
effect. Strawinsky is more of an expert than Moussorgsky; he handles
his medium more freely (has any one ever handled it better?) but he
still preaches the older Russian doctrine of truth of expression, a
doctrine which implies the curt dismissal of all idea of padding.

But all these composers and their contemporaries, and the composers
who came before them, have one quality in common; they all use the
orchestra of their time, or a bigger one. Strauss, to be sure,
introduces a number of new instruments, but he still utilizes a vast
number of violins and violas massed against the other instruments,
diminishing in number according to the volume of sound each makes. He
divides his strings continually, of course; they do not all play alike
as the violins, say, in _Il Barbiere di Siviglia_, but they often all
play at once.

Strawinsky experimented at first with the full orchestra and he even
utilized it in such late works as _Petrouchka_ and _The Nightingale_.
However, in his search for “pure tone” he used it in a new way. In
_Petrouchka_, for example, infrequently you will hear more than _one
of each instrument at a time_ and frequently two, or at most three,
instruments playing simultaneously will be sufficient to give his idea
form. The entire second scene of this mimed drama, is written for solo
piano, occasionally combined with a single other instrument. At other
times in the action the bassoon or the cornet, even the triangle has
the stage. And when he wishes to achieve his most complete effects he
is careful not to use more than seven or eight instruments, and _only
one of each_.

He experimented still further with this principle in his Japanese
songs, for voice and small orchestra (1912). The words are by Akahito,
Mazatsumi, and Tsaraiuki. I have not heard these songs with orchestral
accompaniment (the piano transcription was made by the composer
himself) but I may take the judgment of those who have. I am told that
they are of an indescribable beauty, and instinct with a new colour,
a colour particularly adapted to the oriental naïveté of the lyrics.
The orchestra, to accompany a soprano, consists of two flutes (one
a little flute), two clarinets (the second a bass clarinet), piano
(an instrument which Strawinsky almost invariably includes in his
orchestration), two violins, viola and ’cello. This form of chamber
music, of course, is not rare. Chausson’s violin concerto, with chamber
orchestra, and Schoenberg’s _Pierrot Lunaire_ instantly come to mind,
but Strawinsky did not stop with chamber music. He applied his new
principle to the larger forms.

In his newest work, _The Village Weddings_, which I believe Serge
de Diaghilew hopes to produce, his principle has found its ultimate
expression, I am told by his friend, Ernest Ansermet, conductor of the
Russian Ballet in America and to whom Strawinsky dedicated his three
pieces for string quartet. The last note is dry on the score of this
work, and it is therefore quite possible to talk about it although no
part of it has yet been performed publicly. According to Mr. Ansermet
there is required an orchestra of forty-five men, each a virtuoso, _no
two of whom play the same instrument_ (to be sure there are two violins
but one invariably plays pizzicato, the other invariably bows). There
are novelties in the band but all the conventional instruments are
there including, you may be sure, a piano and an infinite variety
of woodwinds, which always play significant rôles in Strawinsky’s
orchestration. And Mr. Ansermet says that in this work Strawinsky
has achieved effects such as have only been dreamed of by composers
hitherto.... I can well believe him.

He has made another innovation, following, in this case, an idea
of Diaghilew’s. When that impresario determined on a production of
Rimsky-Korsakow’s opera, _The Golden Cock_, during the summer of
1914 he conceived a performance with two casts, one choregraphic
and the other vocal. Thus Mme. Dobrovolska sang the coloratura rôle
of the Queen of Shemakhan while Mme. Karsavina danced the part most
brilliantly on her toes; M. Petrov sang the rôle of King Dodon,
which was enacted by Adolf Bolm, etc. In order to accomplish this
feat Mr. Diaghilew was obliged to make the singers a part of the
decoration. Nathalie Gontcharova, who has been called in to assist
in the production of _The Village Weddings_, devised as part of her
stage setting two tiers of seats, one on either side of the stage,
extending into the flies after the fashion of similar benches used
at the performance of an oratorio. The singers (principals and chorus
together) clad in magenta gowns and caps, all precisely similar, sat
on these seats during the performance and, after a few seconds, they
became quite automatically a part of the decoration. The action took
place in the centre of the stage and the dancers not only mimed their
rôles but also opened and closed their mouths as if they were singing.
The effect was thoroughly diverting and more than one serious person
was heard to declare that the future of opera had been solved, although
Mme. Rimsky-Korsakow, as she had on a similar occasion when the Russian
Ballet had produced Fokine’s version of _Scheherazade_, protested.

Rimsky-Korsakow wrote his opera to be sung in the ordinary fashion,
and, in so far as this matters, it was perhaps a desecration to perform
it in any other manner. However, quite beyond the fact that very large
audiences were hugely delighted with _The Golden Cock_ in its new form,
these performances served to fire Strawinsky with the inspiration for
his new work. He intends _The Village Weddings_ to be given precisely
in this manner. It is an opera, the rôles of which are to be sung by
artists who sit still while the figures of the ballet will enact them.
The words, I am told, are entirely derived from Russian folk stories
and ballads, pieced together by the composer himself, and the action is
to be like that of a marionette show in which the characters are worked
by strings from above. It may also be stated on the same authority that
the music, while embracing new tone colours and dramatic effects, is as
tuneful as any yet set on paper by this extraordinary young man; the
songs have a true folk flavour. The whole, it is probable, will make
as enchanting a stage entertainment as any which this composer has yet
contrived.

It is not only folk-tunes but popular songs as well that fascinate Igor
Strawinsky. Ernest Ansermet collected literally hundreds of examples
of American ragtime songs and dances to take back to the composer,
and he pointed out to me how Strawinsky had used similar specimens
in the past. For example, the barrel organ solo in the first scene
of _Petrouchka_ is a popular French song of several seasons ago, _La
Jambe de Bois_ (a song now forbidden in Paris); the final wedding music
in _The Firebird_ is an _adagio_ version of a popular Russian song,
with indecent words. He sees beauty in these popular tunes, too much
beauty to be allowed to go to waste. In the same spirit he has taken
the melodies of two Lanner waltzes for the dance between the Ballerina
and the Moor in the third scene of _Petrouchka_. It would not surprise
me at all to discover _Hello Frisco_ bobbing up in one of his future
works. After all turn about is fair play; the popular composers have
dug gold mines out of the classics.

Consistent, certainly, is Strawinsky’s delight in clowns and music
halls--the burlesque and the eccentric. He has written a ballet for
four clowns, and Ansermet showed me one day an arrangement for four
hands of three pieces, for small orchestra, in _style music hall_,
dated 1914. We gave what we smilingly referred to as the “first
American audition” on the grand pianoforte in his hotel room. I
played the base, not a matter of any particular difficulty in the
first number, a polka, because the first bar was repeated to the
end. This polka, I found very amusing and we played it over several
times. The valse, which followed, reminded me of the Lanner number
in _Petrouchka_. The suite closed with a march, dedicated to Alfred
Casella.... The pieces would delight any audience, from that of the
Palace Theatre, to that of the concerts of the Symphony Society of New
York.


_New York, February 6, 1916._




Leo Ornstein

  “_the only true blue, genuine Futurist composer alive._”

                                         James Huneker.




Leo Ornstein


The amazing Leo Ornstein!... I should have written the amazing Leo
Ornsteins for “there are many of them and each one of them is one.”
Ornstein himself has a symbol for this diversity; some of his music he
signs “Vannin.” He has told me that the signature is automatic: when
Vannin writes he signs; when Ornstein writes _he_ signs. But it is
not alone in composing that there are many Ornsteins; there are many
pianists as well. One Ornstein paints his tones with a fine soft brush;
the other smears on his colours with a trowel. In his sentimental
treatment of triviality he has scarcely a competitor on the serious
concert stage (unless it be Fanny Bloomfield-Zeisler). Is this the
Caliban, one asks, who conceived and who executes _The Wild Men’s
Dance_? The softer Ornstein is less original than his comrade, more
imitative.... I have been told that Jews are always imitative in art,
that there are no great Jewish composers. Wagner? Well, Wagner was half
a Jew, perhaps. Certainly there is imitation in Ornstein, but so was
there in the young Beethoven, the young Debussy....

Recently I went to hear Ornstein play under a misconception. I thought
that he, with an announced violinist, was going to perform his
anarchistic sonata for violin and piano, opus 31. They did perform
one of his sonatas but it was an earlier opus, 26, I think. At times,
while I listened it seemed to me that nothing so beautiful had been
done in this form since César Franck’s sonata. The first movement had
a rhapsodic character that was absolutely successful in establishing a
mood. The music soared; it did not seem confined at all. It achieved
perfectly the effect of improvisation. The second part was even finer,
and the scherzo and finale only less good. But this was no new idiom. I
looked again and again at my programme; again and again at the man on
the piano stool. Was this not Harold Bauer playing Ravel?... One theme
struck me as astonishingly like Johnson’s air in the last act of _The
Girl of the Golden West_. There was a good use made of the whole-tone
scale and its attendant harmonies, which sounded strangely in our ears
a few seasons past, and a ravishing series of figurations and runs made
one remember that Debussy had described falling water in a similar
fashion.

This over the pianist became less himself--so far as I had become
acquainted with him to this time--than ever. He played a banal
barcarole of Rubinstein’s; to be sure he almost made it sound like an
interesting composition; he played a scherzino of his own that any one
from Schütt to Moszkowski might have signed; he played something of
Grieg’s which may have pleased Mr. Finck and two or three ladies in the
audience but which certainly left me cold; and he concluded this group
with a performance of Liszt’s arrangement of the waltz from Gounod’s
_Faust_. Thereupon there was so much applause that he came back and
played his scherzino again. His répertoire in this _genre_ was probably
too limited to admit of his adding a fresh number.... At this point I
arose and left the hall, more in wonder than in indignation.

Was this the musician who had been reviled and hissed? Was this the
pianist and composer whom Huneker had dubbed the only real futurist in
modern music? It was not the Ornstein I myself had heard a few weeks
previously striking the keyboards with his fists in the vociferous
measures of _The Wild Men’s Dance_; it was not the colour painter of
the two _Impressions of Notre Dame_; it was not the Ornstein who in
a dark corner of Pogliani’s glowed with glee over the possibility of
dividing and redividing the existing scale into eighth, sixteenth, and
twenty-fourth tones.... This was another Ornstein and in searching my
memory I discovered him to be the oldest Ornstein of all. I remembered
five years back when I was assistant to the musical critic of the “New
York Times” and had been sent to hear a boy prodigy play on a Sunday
evening at the New Amsterdam Theatre. Concerts by serious artists at
that period seldom took place outside of recognized concert halls, nor
did they occur on Sunday nights. But there was something about this
concert that impressed itself upon me and I wrote more than the usual
perfunctory notice on this occasion. Here is my account of what I think
must have been Leo Ornstein’s first public appearance (March 5, 1911),
dug from an old scrap book:

“The New Amsterdam Theatre is a strange place for a recital of
pianoforte music, but one was held there last evening, when Leo
Ornstein, the latest wunderkind to claim metropolitan attention,
appeared before a very large audience to contribute his interpretation
of a programme which would have tested any fully grown-up talent.

“It began with Bach’s Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue, included Beethoven’s
_Sonata Appassionata_, six Chopin numbers, and finally Rubinstein’s
D minor concerto, in which young Ornstein was assisted by the Volpe
Symphony Orchestra. To say that this boy has great talent would be to
mention the obvious, but to say that as yet he is ripe for such matters
as he undertook last night would be stretching the truth. It should be
stated, however, that his command of tone colour is already great and
that his technique is usually adequate for the demands which the music
made, although in some passages in the final movement of the Beethoven
sonata his strength seemed to desert him.”

I never even heard of Leo Ornstein again after this concert at the New
Amsterdam (his exploits in Europe escaped my eyes and ears) until he
gave the famous series of concerts at the Bandbox Theatre in January
and February of 1915, a series of concerts which really startled
musical New York and even aroused orchestral conductors, in some
measure, out of their lethargic method of programme-making. So far
as he was able Ornstein constructed his programmes entirely from the
“music of the future,” and patrons of piano recitals were astonished
to discover that a pianist could give four concerts without playing
any music by Bach, Beethoven, Chopin, Schumann, Brahms, Liszt, or
Schubert.... Since these occasions Ornstein has been considered the
high apostle of the new art in America, as the post-futurist composer,
and as a pianist of great technical powers and a luscious tone
quality (it does not seem strange that these attributes are somewhat
exaggerated in so young a man).

Nearly a year later (December 15, 1915, to be exact) Ornstein
gave another concert at the Cort Theatre in New York. Here are my
impressions of that occasion, noted down shortly after:

“Leo Ornstein, a few years ago a poor Russian Jew music student, is
rapidly by way of becoming an institution. His concerts are largely
attended and he is even taken seriously by the press, especially in
England.

“He slouched on the stage, stooping, in his usual listless manner, his
long arms hanging limp at his sides like those of a gorilla. His head
is beautiful, crowned with an overflowing crop of black hair, soulful
eyes, a fine mask. There are pauses without expression but sometimes,
notably when he plays _The Wild Men’s Dance_, his face lights up with a
sort of sardonic appreciation. He has discarded his sack cloth coat for
a velvet jacket of similar cut.

“He began with two lovely impressionistic things by Vannin (Sanborn
says that this is ‘programme for Ornstein’), _The Waltzers_ and
_Night_. A long sonata by Cyril Scott (almost entirely in the
whole-tone scale, sounding consequently like Debussy out of Bach,
for there was a fugue and a smell of the academy) followed. Ravel’s
_Oiseaux Tristes_ twittered their sorrows prettily in the treble, and a
sonatina by the same composer seemed negligible. Albeniz’s _Almeria_, a
section of the twelve-parted _Iberia_, was a Spanish picture of worth.
Ornstein followed with his own pieces, _Improvisata_, a vivid bit of
colour and rhythm, and _Impressions of the Thames_, in which an attempt
was made to picture the heavy smoking barges, the labours on the river,
the shrill sirens of the tugs. The limited (is it, I wonder?) medium
of the piano made all this sound rather Chinese. But some got the
picture. A few laughed. _The Wild Men’s Dance_ convulsed certain parts
of the audience. It always does (but this may well be hysteria); others
were struck with wonder by its thrill. Certainly a powerful massing of
notes, creating wild effects in tone, and a compelling rhythm. In the
_Fairy Pictures_ of Korngold, which closed the programme, Ornstein was
not at his best; nor, for that matter, was Korngold. They were written
when the composer was a very young boy and they are not particularly
original, spontaneous, or beautiful. The difficulties exist for the
player rather than for the hearer.... Ornstein did not bring out their
humour. Humour, as yet, is not an attribute of his playing. He has
always imparted to the piano a beautiful tone; his touch is almost as
fine as Pachmann’s. But his powers are ripening in every direction.
Formerly he dwelt too long on nuances, fussed too much with details.
His style is becoming broader. His technique has always been ample.
There is no doubt but that he will become a power in the music world.”

Some time later I met Leo Ornstein and we talked over a table. He is
fluid in conversation and while he talks he clasps and unclasps his
hands.... He referred to his début at the New Amsterdam. “My ambition
then was to play the concertos of Rubinstein and Tschaikowsky ... and
I satisfied it. Soon after that concert I went abroad.... Suddenly the
new thing came to me, and I began to write and play in the style which
has since become identified with my name. It was music that I felt and
I realized that I had become myself at last, although at first, to be
frank, it horrified me as much as it has since horrified others. Mind
you, when I took the leap I had never seen any music by Schoenberg
or Strawinsky. I was unaware that there was such a generality as
‘futurism.’

“I spent some time in Norway and Vienna, where I met Leschetitzky”
(this incident is referred to elsewhere in this volume) “and then I
went down to Paris. I was very poor.... I met Harold Bauer and one day
I went to play for him. We had a furious argument all day. He couldn’t
understand my music. But he asked me to come again the next day,
and I did. This time Walter Morse Rummel was there and he suggested
that Calvocoressi would be interested in me. So he gave me a note to
Calvocoressi.

“Calvocoressi is a Greek but he speaks all languages. He read my
note of introduction and asked me if I spoke French or English. We
spoke a little Russian together. Then he asked me to play. While I
played his eyes snapped and he uttered several sudden ejaculations.
‘Play that again,’ he said, when I had concluded one piece. Later
on he asked some of his friends to hear me.... At the time he was
giving a series of lectures on modern musicians, Strauss, Debussy,
Dukas, Ravel, Schoenberg, and Strawinsky, and he included _me_ in the
list! I illustrated two of his lectures and after I had concluded
my performance of the music of other composers he asked me to play
something of my own, which I did....” Ornstein looked amusingly
rueful. “The auditors were not actually rude. How could they be when
I followed Calvocoressi? But they giggled a little. Later on in London
they did more than giggle.

“I went to London because my means were getting low. I had almost no
money at all, as a matter of fact.... In London I found Calvocoressi’s
influence of great value (he had already written an article about me)
and some people at Oxford had heard me in Paris. These friends helped;
besides I played the Steinway piano and the Steinways finally gave me a
concert in Steinway Hall. At my first concert (this was in the spring
of 1914) I played music by other composers. At my second concert,
devoted to my own compositions, I might have played anything. I
couldn’t hear the piano myself. The crowd whistled and howled and even
threw handy missiles on the stage ... but that concert made me famous,”
Ornstein wound up with a smile.

He is a hard-working youth, serious, it would seem, to the heart. His
published music is numbered into the thirties and his répertoire is
extensive. He spends a great deal of time working hard on the music of
a bygone age, although he finds it no stimulation for this one, but to
be taken seriously as a pianist he is obliged to prove to melomaniacs
that he has the equipment to play the classic composers. Of all the
compositions that he learns, however, he complains of his own as the
most difficult to memorize; a glance at _The Wild Men’s Dance_ or more
particularly at a page of his second sonata for violin and piano will
convince any one of the truth of this assertion. The chords will prove
strangers to many a well-trained eye. I wonder if so uncannily gifted
a sight reader as Walter Damrosch, who can play an orchestral score on
the piano at sight, could read this music?

Of his principles of composition the boy says only that he writes what
he feels. He has no regard for the rules, although he has studied them
enough to break them thoroughly. He thinks there is an underlying basis
of theory for his method of composition, which may be formulated later.
It is not his purpose to formulate it. He is sincere in his art.

Once he said to me, “I hate cleverness. I don’t want to be clever. I
hate to be called clever. I am not clever. I don’t like clever people.
Art that is merely clever is not art at all.”

With Busoni and Schoenberg he believes that there are no discords, only
chords and chords ... and that there are many combinations of notes,
“millions of them” which have not yet been devised.

“When I feel that the existing enharmonic scale is limiting me I shall
write in quarter tones. In time I think the ear can be trained to
grasp eighth tones. Instruments only exist to perform music and new
instruments will be created to meet the new need. It can be met now on
the violin or in the voice. The piano, of course, is responsible for
the rigidity of the present scale.”

Ornstein never rewrites. If his inspiration does not come the first
time it never comes. He does not try to improve a failure. His method
is to write as much as he can spontaneously on one day, and to pick the
composition up where he left off on the next.

His opinions of other modern composers are interesting: he considers
Ravel greater than Debussy, and speaks with enthusiasm about _Daphnis
et Chloë_. He has played music by Satie in private but does not find
it “stimulating or interesting.” ... Schoenberg ... “the last of the
academics ... all brain, no spirit. His music is mathematical. He does
not feel it. Korngold’s pieces are pretty but he has done nothing
important. Scriabine was a great theorist who never achieved his goal.
He helped others on. But Strawinsky is the most stimulating and
interesting of all the modern composers. He feels what he writes.”

Most of Ornstein’s music is inspired by things about him, some of it by
abstract ideas. His social conscience is awake. He wanted to call _The
Wild Men’s Dance_, _Liberty_ (“I attempted to write music which would
dance itself, which did not require a dancer”), but finally decided
on the more symbolic title. “I am known as a musical anarch now,” he
explained to me, “I could not name a piece of music _Liberty_--at least
not _that_ piece--without associating myself in the public mind with a
certain social propaganda.” Just the same he means the propaganda. In
the _Dwarf Suite_ he gives us a picture of the lives of the struggling
Russian Jews. These dwarfs are symbols.... He is fond of abstract
titles. He often plays his _Three Moods_. “In Boston they did not like
my _Three Moods_. They found my _Anger_ too unrestrained; it was vulgar
to express oneself so freely.... But there is such a thing as anger.
Why should it not find artistic expression? Besides it is a very good
contrast to _Peace_ and _Joy_ which enclose it.” The _Impressions of
the Thames_ I have already referred to. With the two _Impressions of
Notre Dame_ it stands as his successful experiment with impressionism.
The _Notre Dame_ pictures include gargoyles and, of course, bells....
I have not heard the violin and piano sonata, opus 31. Nor can I play
it. Nor can I derive any very adequate idea of how it sounds from a
perusal of the score. Strange music this.... Some time ago some one
sent Ornstein the eight songs of Richard Strauss, Opus 49. The words
of three of these songs (_Wiegenliedchen_, _In Goldener Fülle_, and
_Waldseligkeit_) struck him and he made settings for them. Compare
them with Strauss and you will find the Bavarian’s music scented with
lavender. “In the _Wiegenliedchen_ Strauss gives you a picture of
the woman rocking the cradle for his accompaniment. I have tried to
go further, tried to express the feelings in the woman’s mind, her
hopes for the child when it is grown, her fears. I have tried to get
_underneath_.” But the _Berceuse_ in Ornstein’s _Nine Miniatures_ is
as simple an expression as the lover of Ethelbert Nevin’s style could
wish. Not all of Ornstein’s music is careless of tradition. He was
influenced in the beginning by many people. His _Russian Suite_ is very
pretty. Most of it is like Tschaikowsky. These suites will prove (if
any one wants it proved) that Ornstein can write conventional melody.

Ornstein has also written a composition for orchestra entitled _The
Faun_, which Henry Wood had in mind for performance before the war.
It has not yet been played and I humbly suggest it to our resident
conductors, together with Albeniz’s _Catalonia_, Schoenberg’s _Five
Pieces_, and Strawinsky’s _Sacrifice to the Spring_.

Leo Ornstein was born in 1895 at Krementchug, near Odessa. He is
consequently in his twenty-first year. He is already a remarkable
pianist, one of the very few who may be expected to achieve a position
in the front rank. His compositions have astonished the musical world.
Some of them have even pleased people. Whatever their ultimate value
they have certainly made it a deal easier for concert-goers to listen
to what are called “discords” with equanimity. His music is a modern
expression, untraditional, and full of a strange seething emotion; no
calculation here. And like the best painting and literature of the
epoch it vibrates with the unrest of the period which produced the
great war.


_June 14, 1916._


THE END




[Illustration]


“BORZOI” stands for the best in literature in all its branches--drama
and fiction, poetry and art. “BORZOI” also stands for unusually
pleasing book-making.

BORZOI Books are good books and there is one for every taste worthy of
the name. A few are briefly described on the next page. Mr. Knopf will
be glad to see that you are notified regularly of new and forthcoming
BORZOI Books if you will send him your name and address for that
purpose. He will also see that your local dealer is supplied.

  ADDRESS THE BORZOI
  220 WEST FORTY-SECOND STREET
  NEW YORK




THE NEW BORZOI BOOKS

_Published by_ ALFRED A. KNOPF


  TALES OF THE PAMPAS By W. H. Hudson, author of “Green
    Mansions.” Including what Edward Garnett calls “the finest
    short story in English.” Three-color jacket.                   $1.25

  A DRAKE! BY GEORGE! By John Trevena. A perfectly
    delightful tale of Devonshire, with plot and humor a-plenty.   $1.50

  THE CRUSHED FLOWER From the Russian of Leonid Andreyev.
    Three novelettes and some great short stories by this master.  $1.50

  JOURNALISM VERSUS ART By Max Eastman. A brilliant
    and searching analysis of what is wrong with our magazine
    writing and illustrations. Many pictures of unusual interest.  $1.00

  MODERN RUSSIAN HISTORY From the Russian of Alexander Kornilov.
    The only work in English that comes right down to the present
    day. Two volumes, boxed, per set.                              $5.00

  THE RUSSIAN SCHOOL OF PAINTING From the Russian of Alexandre
    Benois, with an introduction by Christian Brinton and
    thirty-two full-page plates. The only survey in English.       $3.00

  SUSSEX GORSE By Sheila Kaye-Smith. A wonderfully vigorous and
    powerful novel of Sussex. A really masterly book.              $1.50

  RUSSIA’S MESSAGE By William English Walling, with 31
    illustrations. A new and revised edition of this most
    important work.                                                $2.00

  WAR From the Russian of Michael Artzibashef, author of
    “Sanine.” A four-act play of unusual power and strength.       $1.00

  MORAL From the German of Ludwig Thoma. A three-act comedy that
    is unlike anything ever attempted in English.                  $1.00

  MOLOCH By Beulah Marie Dix. Probably the most thrilling play
    ever written about war.                                        $1.00

  THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL From the Russian of Nicolai Gogol,
    author of “Taras Bulba.” The first adequate version in English
    of this masterpiece of comedy.                                 $1.00

  THE SHAVING OF SHAGPAT A handsome holiday edition of George
    Meredith’s Arabian Entertainment. With fifteen beautiful
    plates and an introduction by George Eliot. Quarto.            $5.00


_All prices are net._

220 WEST FORTY-SECOND STREET, NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s Note

New original cover art included with this eBook is granted to the
public domain.

Minor punctuation errors have been changed without notice. Hyphenation
was standardized.

Spelling was retained as in the original except for the following
changes:

  Page 44: “Greig’s _Peer Gynt_”         “Grieg’s _Peer Gynt_”
  Page 73: “_l’Heure Espagnole_”         “_L’heure Espagnole_”
  Page 77: “colour of Zurburan”          “colour of Zurbaran”
  Page 77: “Juan de Juares”              “Juan de Juarez”
  Page 84: “_Fantasy_ of Farrega”        “_Fantasy_ of Tárrega”
  Page 136: “oder Der misverstandene”    “oder Der missverstandene”
  Page 178: “is a _pointe de depart_”    “is a _point de départ_”




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75908 ***
﻿
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75931 ***





MY ADVENTURES AS A GERMAN SECRET AGENT




[Illustration: The Bridgeman H. Taylor passport upon which von der Goltz
returned to Germany and later went to England. In the upper right hand
corner is the visé of the American Embassy at Berlin.]




                              My Adventures
                                   AS A
                           German Secret Agent

                                    BY
                        CAPT. HORST VON DER GOLTZ
            FORMERLY MAJOR IN THE MEXICAN CONSTITUTIONAL ARMY.
             SOMETIME CONFIDENTIAL AIDE TO CAPTAIN VON PAPEN,
                RECALLED MILITARY ATTACHÉ TO THE IMPERIAL
                      GERMAN EMBASSY AT WASHINGTON,
                           GERMAN SECRET AGENT.

                              _ILLUSTRATED_

                                 NEW YORK
                       ROBERT M. McBRIDE & COMPANY
                                   1917

                             Copyright, 1917
                                    by
                       ROBERT M. MCBRIDE & COMPANY

                             Published, 1917




“One must at times separate a gentleman and a diplomat from his official
acts performed under orders from his home government, otherwise great
confusion and injustice will occur. Some governments have a little way of
telling those who represent them abroad ... to get such and such a thing
done, and done it must be. Nor would those high Government officials at
home care often to hear painful details of the successful execution of
many such orders which are given.”

                 from _“The Strangling of Persia,” by W. Morgan Shuster_.




                                  TO THE
                    UNITED STATES OF GERMANY—WHENEVER
                          THEY MAY COME TO BE—I
                     DEDICATE THIS BOOK AND MY HOPES.




CONTENTS


    CHAPTER                                                           PAGE

       Foreword                                                          1

     I—I find an old letter, containing a strange bit of scandal—and
         its contents draw me into the service of the Kaiser             5

    II—I Impersonate a Russian Prince and steal a treaty. What the
         treaty contained and how Germany made use of the knowledge     22

   III—Of what comes of leaving important papers exposed. I look
         and talk indiscreetly—and a man dies                           45

    IV—I am sent to Geneva and learn of a plot. How there are more
         ways of getting rid of a King than by blowing him up with
         dynamite                                                       61

     V—Germany displays an interest in Mexico, and aids the United
         States for her own purposes. The Japanese-Mexican treaty
         and its share in the downfall of Diaz                          88

    VI—My letter again. I go to America and become a United States
         soldier. Sent to Mexico and sentenced to death there. I
         join Villa’s army and gain an undeserved reputation           111

   VII—War. I re-enter the German service and am appointed aide to
         Captain von Papen. The German conception of neutrality and
         how to make use of it. The plot against the Welland Canal     151

  VIII—I go to Germany on a false passport. Italy in the early
         days of the war. I meet the Kaiser and talk to him about
         Mexico and the United States                                  173

    IX—In England—and how I reached there. I am arrested and
         imprisoned for fifteen months. What von Papen’s baggage
         contained. I make a sworn statement                           190

     X—The German intrigue against the United States. Von Papen,
         Boy-Ed and von Rintelen, and the work they did. How the
         German-Americans were used and how they were betrayed         212

    XI—More about the German intrigue against the United States.
         German aims in Latin America. Japan and Germany in Mexico.
         What happened in Cuba?                                        236

   XII—The last stand of German intrigue. Germany’s spy system in
         America. What is coming?                                      264




ILLUSTRATIONS


  The false passport upon which Capt. von der Goltz went to
    England                                                   FRONTISPIECE

                                                               FACING PAGE

  Photograph of Capt. von der Goltz taken outside the Cuartel at
    Juarez                                                              28

  Raul Madero and his staff                                             42

  A group of recruits in Villa’s Army                                   42

  Von der Goltz’s commission as Major in the Mexican
    Constitutional Army                                                 64

  Colonel Trinidad Rodriguez, Capt. von der Goltz’s first
    commander, and General Villa                                        88

  General Raul Madero                                                   88

  A telegram from General Villa to Capt. von der Goltz                 112

  A group of Constitutional soldiers                                   124

  The six months’ leave of absence from the Mexican Army, granted
    to Capt. von der Goltz at the outbreak of the European War         140

  A letter of recommendation given to Capt. von der Goltz by Raul
    Madero                                                             140

  A letter from Dr. Kraske, German vice-consul at New York to
    “Baron” von der Goltz                                              152

  Captain von Papen’s letter to the German consuls at Baltimore
    and St. Paul, asking for their assistance in Capt. von der
    Goltz’s enterprise                                                 166

  How Capt. von der Goltz secured explosives for his Welland
    Canal Expedition. Two communications from Capt. Tauscher           178

  Bills from the du Pont de Nemours Powder Co. for “merchandise”
    furnished Capt. von der Goltz                                      180

  The check which almost cost Capt. von der Goltz his life             196

  Safe Deposit receipts for papers which von der Goltz left in
    Rotterdam                                                          210

  The British order for the deportation of Capt. von der Goltz         240

  Photograph of the cover of the British white paper containing
    Capt. von der Goltz’s confession                                   256




FOREWORD.


I have not attempted to write an autobiography. This book is merely
a summary—a sort of galloping summary—of the last ten years of my
existence. As such, I venture to write it because my life has been bound
up in enterprises in which the world is interested. It has been my
fortune to be a witness and sometimes an actor in that drama of secret
diplomacy which has been going on for so long and which in such a large
way has been responsible for this war.

There are many scenes from that drama that have no place in this
book—many events with which I am familiar that I have not touched upon.
My aim has been to describe only those things with which I was personally
concerned and which I know to be true. For a full history of the last
ten years my readers must go elsewhere; but it is my hope that these
adventures of mine will bring them to a better understanding of the
forces that have for so long been undermining the peace of the world.

Inevitably there will be some who read this book, who will doubt the
truth of many of the statements in it. I cannot, unfortunately, prove all
that I tell here. Wherever possible I have offered corroborative evidence
of the truth of my statements; at other times I have tried to indicate
their credibility by citing well recognized facts which have a direct
bearing upon my contentions. But for the rest, I can only hope that this
book will be accepted as a true record of facts which by their very
nature are insusceptible of proof.

So far as my connection with the German Government is concerned, I
may refer the curious to the British Parliamentary White Papers,
Miscellaneous Nos. 6 and 13, which contain respectively my confession
and a record of the papers found in the possession of Captain von Papen,
former military attaché to the German Embassy at Washington, and seized
by the British authorities on January 2 and 3, 1916. There are also, in
addition to the documents reproduced in this book, various court records
of the trial of Captain Hans Tauscher and others in the spring of the
same year. Of German activities in the United States, the newspapers bear
eloquent testimony. I have been concerned rather with the motives of
the German Government than with a statement of what has been done. These
motives, I believe, you will not doubt.

But there is one point which I must ask my readers not to overlook. I
have told that I became a secret agent through the discovery of a certain
letter which contained very serious reflections upon one of the most
important personages in the world. I have told, also, how the possession
of that letter had an important bearing upon the course of my life—how
it led me to America, and how in the struggle for its possession, I very
nearly lost my life. This, I know, will be severely questioned by many.
Before rejecting this part of my story, I ask merely that you consider
the fate that overtook Koglmeier, the saddler of El Paso, whose only
crime was that he had been partially in my confidence. I ask you to
recall that another German, Lesser, who had been associated with me at
the same time, mysteriously disappeared in 1915, shortly before von Papen
left for Europe. No one has been able to prove why these men were treated
as they were. And if I did not have in my possession _something_ which
the German Government regarded as highly important, why the surprising
actions of that Government, actions none the less astonishing because
they are well known and authenticated? Consider these things before you
doubt.

Finally, let me say that I have taken the liberty of changing or omitting
the names of various people who are mentioned in these adventures,
merely because I have had no wish to compromise them by disclosing their
identity.

[Illustration: H. von der Goltz]

New York, July 8, 1917.




_ERRATA_


_Page 5. Chapter I. First line_: March 28th, 1917 should read March 29th,
1916.

_Page 41_: Kut el Amerara should read Kut el Amara.

_Page 140. Last two paragraphs_: December 23rd should read December 20th.

_Page 171. Second paragraph_: October 8th should read October 3rd, 1914.

=Transcriber’s Note:= The errata have been corrected.




My Adventures as a German Secret Agent




CHAPTER I

    _I find an old letter, containing a strange bit of scandal—and
    its contents draw me into the service of the Kaiser._


On March 29th, 1916, the steamer _Finland_ was warped into its Hudson
River dock and I hurried down the gang plank. I was not alone. Agents
of the United States Department of Justice had met me at Quarantine;
and a man from Scotland Yard was there also—a man who had attended me
sedulously since, barely two weeks before, I had been released under
rather unusual circumstances from Lewes prison in England; the last of
four English prisons in which I had spent fifteen months in solitary
confinement waiting for the day of my execution.

My friend from Scotland Yard left me very shortly; soon after, I was
testifying for the United States Government against Capt. Hans Tauscher,
husband of Mme. Johanna Gadski, the diva. Tauscher, American agent of
the Krupps and of the German Government, was charged with complicity in
a plot to blow up the Welland Canal in Canada during the first month of
the Great War. During the course of the trial it was shown that von Papen
and others (including myself) had entered into a conspiracy to violate
the neutrality of the United States. I had led the expedition against the
Welland Canal and I was telling everything I knew about it. Doubtless you
remember the newspapers of the day.

You will remember how, at that time, the magnitude of the German plot
against the neutrality of the United States became finally apparent. You
will remember how, in connection with my exposure came the exposure of
von Igel, of Rintelen, of the German Consul-General at San Francisco,
Bopp, and many others. With all of these men I was familiar. In the
activities of some of them I was implicated. It was I, as I have said,
who planned the details of the Welland Canal plot. I shall tell the true
story of these activities later on.

But first let me tell the story of how I became to be concerned in these
plots—and to do that I must go back over many years; I must tell how I
first became a member of the Kaiser’s Secret Diplomatic Force (to give
it a name) and incidentally I shall describe for the first time the real
workings of that force.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have been in and out of the Kaiser’s web for ten years. I have served
him faithfully in many capacities and in many places—all over Europe,
in Mexico, even in the United States. I served the German Government as
long as I believed it to be representing the interests of my countrymen.
But from the moment that I became convinced that the men who made up
the Government—the Hohenzollerns, the Junkers and the bureaucrats—were
anxious merely to preserve their own power, even at the expense of
Germany itself, my attitude toward them changed. That is why I write this
book—and why I shall tell what I know of the aims and ambitions of these
men—enemies of Germany as well as of the rest of the world.

I was not a spy; nor was I a secret service agent. I was, rather, a
secret diplomatic agent. Let me add that there is a nice distinction
between the three. A secret diplomatic agent is a man who directs
spies, who studies their reports, who pieces together various bits of
information, and who, when he has the fabric complete, personally makes
his report to the highest authority or carries that particular plan to
its desired conclusion. His work and his status are of various sorts.
Unlike the spy, he is a user, not a getter, of information. He is a free
lance, responsible only to the Foreign Office; a plotter; an unofficial
intermediary in many negotiations; and frequently he differs from an
accredited diplomatic representative, only in that his activities and
his office are essentially secret. Obviously men of this type must be
highly trained and reliable; and their constant association with men of
authority makes it necessary that they, themselves, be men of breeding
and education. But above all, they must possess the courage that shrinks
at no danger, and a devotion, a patriotism that knows no scruples.

This, then, was the calling into which I found myself plunged, while
still a boy, by one of the strangest chances that ever befell me, whose
life has been full of strange happenings.

As I recall my adolescence I realize that I was a normal boy, vigorous,
wilful, fond of sport, of horses, dogs and guns, and I know that but for
the chance I speak of, I should have grown up to the traditions of our
family—Cadet school—the University—later a lieutenancy in the German
Army—and to-day, perhaps, death “somewhere in France.”

And yet, in that boyhood that I am recalling, I can remember that there
were other interests which were far greater than the games that I loved,
as did all lads of my age. Mental adventure, the matching of wits against
wits for stakes of reputation and fortune, always exercised an uncanny
fascination over my mind. That delight in intrigue was shown by the books
I read as a boy. In the library of my father’s house there were many
novels, books of poems, of biography, travel, philosophy and history; but
I passed them by unread. His few volumes of court gossip and so-called
“secret history” I seized with avidity. I used to bear off the memoirs of
Maréchal Richelieu, the Cardinal’s nephew, and read them in my room when
the rest of the household was asleep.

I recall, too, that there was another tendency already developed in me. I
see it in my dealings with other boys of that day. It was the impulse to
make other people my instruments, not by direct command or appeal, but by
leading them to do, apparently for themselves, what I needed of them.

Such was I, when my aunt who had cared for me since the death of my
parents some years before, fell ill and later died. I was disconsolate
for a time and wandered about through the halls and chambers of the
house, seeking amusement. And it was thus that one day I came upon an
old chest in the room that had been hers. I remembered that chest. There
were letters in it—letters that had been written to her by friends made
in the old days when she was at court. Often she had read me passages
from them—bits of gossip about this or that personage whom she had once
known—occasionally, even, mention of the Kaiser.

Doubtless, too, I thought, there were passages which she had not seen fit
to read to me: some more intimate bits of gossip about those brilliant
men and women in Berlin whom I then knew only as names. With the eager
curiosity of a boy I sought the key, and in a moment had unlocked the
chest.

There they lay, those neat, faded bundles, slightly yellow, addressed
in a variety of hands. Idly I selected a packet and glanced over the
envelopes it contained, lingering, in anticipation of the revelations
that might be in them. I must have read a dozen letters before my eye
fell upon the envelope that so completely changed my life.

It lay in a corner of the chest, as if hidden from too curious eyes—a
yellow square of paper, distinguished from its fellows by the quality of
the stationery alone, and by its appearance of greater age. But I knew,
before I had read fifty words of it, that I was holding in my hands a
document that was more explosive than dynamite!

For this letter, written to my aunt years before, by one of the most
exalted personages in all of Germany, contained statements which, had
they been made by any one else, would have been treason to utter, and
_which cast the most serious doubts upon the legitimacy of the Kaiser,
Wilhelm II_.

I realize fully that what I have written will seem grossly improbable to
most of my readers. I know that few persons will believe me. And since
I cannot prove what I have said, since the letter is no longer in my
possession, I can ask you only to consider the facts and to weigh for
yourself the probabilities of my statement.

Those of you whose memories go back to the last twenty years of the
nineteenth century, will readily recall the notorious ill-feeling that
existed between Wilhelm II and his mother, Victoria, the Dowager Empress
Friederich. Stories have too often been told of this enmity, culminating
in the virtual banishment from Berlin of the Queen Mother, for me to
need do more than mention them. But what is not so generally known is
the small esteem in which Victoria was held by the entire German people.
During the twenty years of her married life as the wife of the then
Crown Prince Friederich, she was treated by Berlin society with the
most thinly-veiled hostility. Even Bismarck made no attempt to conceal
his dislike for her, and accused her—to quote his own words—of having
“poisoned the fountain of Hohenzollern blood at its source.”

Victoria, for her part, although she seems to have had no animosity
toward the German people, certainly possessed little love for her eldest
son, and did her best to delay his ascension to the Imperial throne as
long as she could. When in 1888 Wilhelm I was dying, she tried her utmost
to secure the succession to her husband, who was then lying dangerously
ill at San Remo. “Cancer,” the physicians pronounced the trouble, and
even the great German specialist, Bergman, agreed with their diagnosis.
There is a law that prevents any one with an incurable disease, such
as cancer, from ascending the Prussian throne; but Victoria knew too
well the attitude of her son, Wilhelm, toward herself, not to wish to do
everything in her power to prevent him from becoming Emperor so long as
she could. In her extremity she appealed to her mother, Queen Victoria of
England, who sent Mackenzie, the great English surgeon, to San Remo to
report on Friederich’s condition. Mackenzie opposed Bergman and said the
disease was _not_ cancer; and the physicians inserted a silver tube in
Friederich’s throat, and in due course he became Emperor Friederich III.

But in spite of Mackenzie and the silver tube, Friederich III died after
a reign of ninety-eight days—and he died of cancer.

Now what was the reason for this hostility between mother and son
and between Empress and subjects? There have been many answers
given—Victoria’s love for England, her colossal lack of tact, her
impatient unconventionality. Berlin whispered of a dinner in Holland
years before, when Victoria had entertained some English people she
met there—people she had never seen before—and had finished her
repast by smoking a cigar. That in the days when the sight of a
woman smoking horrified the German soul! And Berlin hinted at worse
unconventionalities than this.

As for the animosity of the Kaiser, that was attributed to the fact that
he held her responsible for his withered left arm.

Plausible reasons, all of these, and possibly true. But consider, if
you will, the rumors that followed Victoria all her life—the story of
an early attachment to the Count Seckendorf, her husband’s associate
during the Seven Weeks’ War of 1866—the reports, sometimes denied but
generally believed, of her marriage to the Count not long before her
death. Consider, too, the dissimilarity between the Kaiser and the other
men of his race—big, slow-minded, amiable men—so unlike Wilhelm II, with
his aggressive, alert personality, his quick mind and his Piedmontese
face. And can you not imagine the attitude of a woman who had been guilty
of infidelity and yet retained her sense of national honor—the hesitancy
she might feel at seeing the child of this infidelity upon the throne,
and so perpetrating a gigantic fraud upon a people and a husband whom she
respected if she did not love? And have not women been known to hate,
rather than love, the offspring of a guilty union?

True or not, these suppositions—what does it matter? You can see, can
you not, why I believed that my letter told the truth, and why I knew
that here was a plaything which would astound the world, if made public?

But what to do with this letter to which I attached so much importance?
Something impelled me not to speak of it to my family. But who else was
there?

In my perplexity I did an utterly foolish thing. I put my whole
confidence in a man’s word. There was, serving at a nearby fortress, a
General Major von Dassel, who was in the habit of coming to our house
quite regularly. To him I went, and under pledge of silence I told him my
story. Of course, he broke the pledge and left immediately for Berlin.
All doubts, if I had any, as to the importance of the document vanished
with him. And if I had any misgivings concerning my own importance they
quickly vanished, too. Back from Berlin, with General Major von Dassel
came an agent of the _Reichs Kanzler_. He did not come to our house;
instead von Dassel sent for me to go to his headquarters in the fortress.
I met there a solemn frock-coated personage who, so he said, had come
down from Berlin especially to see me. Imagine my elation! I was in
my element; what I had hoped for had at last happened. The pages of
Richelieu and of my secret histories were coming true. Another man and I
were to lock our wits in a fight to the finish—that pleasure I promised
myself. He was a worthy opponent, an official, a professional intriguer.
As I looked into his serious, bearded face, I built romances about him.

The agent of the Chancellor wanted my document and my pledge to keep
silent about its contents. Through sheer love of combat, I refused him
on both points. He tried persuasion and reason. I was adamant. He tried
cajolery.

“It is plain,” he said, in a voice that was caressingly agreeable, “that
you are an extremely clever young man. I have never before met your
like—that is, at your age. A great career will be possible to such a
young man if only he shows himself eager to serve his government, eager
to meet the wishes of his Chancellor.”

Of course, I was delighted with this flattery, which I felt was entirely
deserved. I began to believe that I was a person of importance. I became
stubborn—which always has been one of my best and worst traits. I saw
that the gentleman in the frock-coat was becoming angry; his serious eyes
flashed. Apparently much against his will, he tried threats; he suavely
pointed out that if I persisted in my resolve not to turn over the
document, destruction yawned at my feet. The threats touched off the fuse
of my romanticism. I felt I was leading the life of intrigue of which I
had read.

“If you will wait here,” I told him, “I shall go home and get the
document for you.”

The Chancellor’s representative stroked his beard, deliberated a moment
and seemed uncertain.

“Oh, the Junge will come back all right,” put in the General Major von
Dassel. But the Junge did not come back. My family had always been
excessively liberal with money, and I had enough in my own little “war
chest” to buy a railroad ticket, and a considerable amount besides. So
I promptly ran off to Paris; and to this day I don’t know how long the
gentleman in the frock-coat waited for me in von Dassel’s office.

The terrors and thrills and delight of that panic stricken flight
still make me smile. No peril I have since been through was half as
exciting.... Berlin!... Köln!... Brussels! It was a race against
apprehension. I was happily frightened, much as a colt is, when it shies
at its own shadow. Although I was in long trousers and looked years
older than I was, I had not sense enough to see the affair in its true
light—a foolish escapade which was quite certain to have disagreeable
consequences. And so I fled from Berlin to Paris.

From Paris I fled, too. There, any circumstance struck my fevered
imagination as being suspicious. After a day in the French capital,
I scurried south to Nice and from Nice to Monte Carlo. Precocious
youngster, indeed, for there I had my first experience with that favored
figure of the novelist, the woman secret agent. No novelist, I venture to
say, would ever have picked her out of the Riviera crowd as being what
she was. She wore no air of mystery; and though attractive enough in a
quiet way, she was very far from the siren type in looks or manners. The
friendliness that she, a woman of the mid-thirties, showed a lonely boy
was perfectly natural. I should never have guessed her to be an agent
of the Wilhelmstrasse had she not chosen to let me know it. Of course,
the moment she spoke to me of “my document,” I knew she had made my
acquaintance with a purpose. If the dear old frock-coated agent of the
Chancellor had been asleep, the telegraph wires from Berlin to Paris and
Nice and Monte Carlo had been quite awake.

The proof that I was actually watched and waited for thrilled me anew.
It also alarmed me when my friend explained how deeply my government was
affronted. Soon the alarm outgrew the thrill and in the end I quite broke
down. Then the woman in her, touched with pity, apparently displaced the
adventuress. We took counsel together and she showed me a way out.

“Your document,” she said, “has a Russian as well as a German importance.
Why not try Petersburg since Berlin is hostile? For the sake of what you
bring, Russia might give shelter and protection.”

Remember, I was very young and she was all kindness. Yes, she discovered
for me the avenue of escape and she set my foot upon it in the most
motherly way. And I unknowingly took my first humble lesson in the great
art of intrigue. For as I learned years afterwards, that woman was not a
German agent but a Russian!

But at that time I was all innocent gratitude for her kindness. I was
thankful enough to proceed to Petersburg by way of Italy, Constantinople
and Odessa. Of course, she must have designated a man unknown to me to
travel with me, and make sure that I reached the Russian capital. To my
hotel in Petersburg, just as the woman had predicted, came an officer of
the political police, who courteously asked me not to leave the building
for twenty-four hours. The next day the man from the _Okrana_ came again.
This time he had a droshky waiting, with one of those bull-necked, blue
corduroy-robed, muscular Russian jehus on the box. We were driven down
the Nevsky-Prospect to a palace. Here I soon found myself in the presence
of a man I did not then know as Count Witte. He greeted me kindly, merely
remarking that he had heard I was in some difficulties, and offering me
aid and advice. My letter was not referred to and the interview ended.

So began the process of drawing me out. A fortnight later the matter of
my information was broached openly and the suggestion was made that if I
delivered it to the Russian Government, high officials would be friendly
and a career assured me in Russia, as I grew up. But by that time Germany
had changed her attitude. Her agents also reached me in St. Petersburg.
From them I received new assurance of the importance of the document. If
I would release it—so the German agent who came to my hotel told me—and
keep my tongue still, Berlin would pardon my indiscretion and assure
me a career at home. Russia or Germany? My decision was quickly made.
That very night I was smuggled out of Petersburg and whisked across the
frontier at Alexandrovna, into Germany; and the letter passed out of my
hands—for the time being.




CHAPTER II.

    _I Impersonate a Russian Prince and steal a treaty. What the
    treaty contained and how Germany made use of the knowledge._


Gross Lichterfelde! As I write, it all comes back to me clearly, in spite
of the full years that have passed—this, my first home in Berlin. A huge
pile of buildings set in a suburb of the city, grim and military in
appearance; and in fact, as I soon discovered.

I was to become a cadet, it seems; and where in Germany could one receive
better training than in this same Gross Lichterfelde?

At home I had had some small experience with the exactions of the
_gymnasium_; but now I found that this was but so much child’s play
in comparison to the life at Gross Lichterfelde. We were drilled
and dragooned from morning till night: mathematics, history, the
languages—they were not taught us, they were literally pounded into us.
And the military training! I am not unfamiliar with the curricula of
Sandhurst, of St. Cyr, even of West Point, but I honestly believe that
the training we had to undergo was fully as arduous and as technical as
at any of those schools. And we were only boys.

Military strategy and tactics; sanitation; engineering; chemistry; in
fact, any and every study that could conceivably be of use to these
future officers of the German Army; to all of these must we apply
ourselves with the utmost diligence. And woe to the student who shirked!

Then there was the endless drilling, that left us with sore muscles and
minds so worn with the monotony of it that we turned even to our studies
with relief. And the supervision! Our very play was regulated.

Can you wonder that we hated it and likened the cadet school to a prison?
And can you imagine how galling it was to me, who had come to Berlin
seeking romance and found drudgery?

But we learned. Oh, yes. The war has shown how well we learned.

There was one relief from the constant study which was highly prized by
all the cadets at Gross Lichterfelde. It was the custom to select from
our school a number of youths to act as pages at the Imperial court;
and lucky were the ones who were detailed to this service. It meant a
vacation, at the very least, to say nothing of a change from the Spartan
fare of the cadet school.

I must have been a student for a full three months before my turn came;
long enough, at any rate, for me to receive the news of my selection
with the utmost delight. But I had not been on service at the Imperial
Palace for more than a few days when a state dinner was given in honor
of a guest at court. He was a young prince of a certain grand-ducal
house, which by blood was half Russian and half German. I recall the
appearance of myself and the other pages, as we were dressed for the
function. Ordinarily we wore a simple undress cadet uniform, but that
evening a striking costume was provided: nothing less than a replica
of the garb of a mediaeval herald—tabard and all—for Wilhelm II has a
flair for the feudal. From my belt hung a capacious pouch, which, pages
of longer standing than I assured me, was the most important part of my
equipment; since by custom the ladies were expected to keep these pouches
comfortably filled with sweetmeats. Candy for a cadet! No wonder every
boy welcomed his turn at page duty, and went back reluctantly to the
asceticism of Gross Lichterfelde.

That was my first sight of an Imperial dinner. The great banquet
hall that overlooks the square on the Ufer, was ablaze with lights.
The guests—the men in their uniforms even more than the women—made a
brilliant spectacle to the eyes of a youngster from the provinces; but
most brilliant of all was Wilhelm II, resplendent in the full dress
uniform of a field marshal. I can recall him as he sat there, lordly,
arrogant, yet friendly, but never seeming to forget the monarch in the
host. It seemed to me that he loved to disconcert a guest with his
remarks; it delighted him to set the table laughing at some one’s else
expense.

By chance, during the banquet, it fell to me to render service to the
young prince. Once, as I moved behind his chair, a German Princess
exclaimed, “Oh, doesn’t the page resemble his Highness?”

The Kaiser looked at me sharply.

“Yes,” he agreed, “they might well be twins.” Then, impulsively lifting
up his glass, he flourished it toward the Russo-German prince and drank
to him.

That was all there was to the incident—then. I returned to Gross
Lichterfelde the next morning, and proceeded to think no more of the
matter. Nor did it come to my mind when a few weeks later, I was
suddenly summoned to Berlin, and driven, with one of my instructors, to
a private house in a street I did not know. (It was the Wilhelmstrasse,
and the residence stood next to Number 75, the Foreign Office. It was
the house Berlin speaks of as Samuel Meyer’s _Bude_—in other words, the
private offices of the Chancellor and His Imperial Majesty.)

We entered a room, bare save for a desk or two and a portrait of Wilhelm
I, where my escort surrendered me to an official, who silently surveyed
me, comparing his observations with a paper he held, which apparently
contained my personal measurements. Later a photograph was taken of me,
and then I was bidden to wait. I waited for several hours, it seemed to
me, before a second official appeared—a large, round-faced man, soldierly
despite his stoutness—who greeted my escort politely and, taking a
photograph from his pocket, proceeded to scrutinize me carefully. After a
moment he turned to my escort.

“Has he any identifying marks on his body?” he asked.

My escort assured him that there were none.

“Good!” he exclaimed; and a moment later we were driving back toward
Gross Lichterfelde—I quite at sea about the whole affair, but not daring
to ask questions about it. Idle curiosity was not encouraged among cadets.

I was not to remain in ignorance for long, however. A few days later I
was ordered to pack my clothing, and with it was transferred to a quiet
hotel on the Dorotheen Strasse. The hotel was not far from the War
Academy, and there I was placed under the charge of an exasperatingly
puttering tutor, who strove to perfect me on but three points. He
insisted that my French be impeccable; he made me study the private and
detailed history of a certain Russian house; and he was most particular
about the way I walked and ate, about my knowledge of Russian ceremonies
and customs—in a word, about my deportment in general.

The weeks passed. At last, by dint of much hard work, I became
sufficiently expert in my studies to satisfy my tutor. I was taken back
to the house on the Wilhelmstrasse, where the round-faced man again
inspected me. He talked with me at length in French, made me walk before
him and asked me innumerable questions about the family history of
the house I had been studying. Finally he drew a photograph from his
pocket—the same, I fancy, which had figured in our previous interview.

“Do you recognize this face?” he inquired, offering me the picture.

I started. It might have been my own likeness. But no! That uniform
was never mine. Then in a moment I realized the truth and with the
realization the whole mystery of the last few weeks began to be clear to
me. The photograph was a portrait of the young Prince Z——; my double,
whom I had served at the banquet.

“It is a very remarkable likeness,” said the round-faced man. “And it
will be of good service to the Fatherland.”

He eyed me for a moment impressively before continuing.

“You are to go to Russia,” he told me. “Prince Z—— has been invited to
visit his family in St. Petersburg, and he has accepted the invitation.
But unfortunately Prince Z—— has discovered that he cannot go. You will,
therefore become the Prince—for the time being. You will visit your
family, note everything that is said to you and report to your tutor,
Herr ——, who will accompany you and give you further instructions.

“This is an important mission,” he added solemnly, “but I have no doubt
that you will comport yourself satisfactorily. You have been taught
everything that is necessary; and you have already shown yourself a young
man of spirit and some discretion. We rely upon both of these qualities.”
He bowed in dismissal of us, but as we turned to go he spoke again.

[Illustration: This photograph, taken outside the Cuartel at Juarez,
Mexico, shows von der Goltz (at the right), then a Major in the Mexican
Army, and Lieut. Leiva, a Mexican officer later reported killed in
battle.]

“Remember,” he was saying. “From this day you are no longer a cadet. You
are a prince. Act accordingly.”

That was all. We were out of the door and halfway to our hotel before I
realized to the full the great adventure I had embarked upon. Embarked?
Shanghaied would be the better term. I had had no choice in the matter,
whatsoever. I had not even uttered a word during the interview.

At any rate, that night I left for Petrograd—still St. Petersburg at that
time—accompanied by my tutor and two newly engaged valets, who did not
know the real Prince. Of what was ahead I had no idea, but as my tutor
had no doubts of the success of our mission, I wasted little time in
speculating upon the future.

What the real prince’s motive was in agreeing to the masquerade, and
where he spent his time while I was in Russia, I have never been able to
discover. From what followed, I surmise that he was strongly pro-German
in his sympathies but distrusted his ability to carry through the task in
hand.

In St. Petersburg I discovered that my “relatives”—whom I had known to
be very exalted personages—were inclined to be more than hospitable to
this young kinsman whom they had not seen in a long time. I found myself
petted and spoiled to a delightful degree; indeed I had a truly princely
time. The only drawback was that, as the constant admonitions of my
tutor reminded me, I could spend my princely wealth only in such ways as
my—shall I say, predecessor?—would have done. He, alas, was apparently a
graver youth than I.

So two weeks passed, while I was beginning to wish that the masquerade
would continue indefinitely, when one day my tutor sent for me.

“So,” he said, “We have had play enough, not so? Now we shall have work.”

In a few words he explained the situation to me. Russia, it seemed, was
about to enter into an agreement with England, regarding what appeared
to be practically a partitioning of Persia. Already a certain Baron B——
(let me call him) was preparing to leave St. Petersburg with instructions
to find out under what circumstances the British Government would enter
into pourparlers on the subject. Berlin, whose interests in the Near East
would be menaced by such an agreement, needed information—and delay. I
was to secure both. It was the old trick of using a little instrument to
clog the mechanism of a great machine.

Let me explain here a feature of the drawing up of international treaties
and agreements which, I think, is not generally understood. Most of us
who read in the newspapers that such and such a treaty is being arranged
between the representatives of two countries, believe that the terms
are even then being decided upon. As a matter of fact these terms have
long since been determined by other representatives of the two countries
concerned, and the present meeting is merely for the formal and public
ratification of a treaty that has already been secretly made. The usual
stages in the making of a treaty are three: First, an unofficial inquiry
by one government into the willingness or unwillingness of the other
government to enter into a discussion of the question at issue. This is
usually done by a man who has no official standing as a diplomat at the
moment, but whose affiliations with officials in the second country have
given him an influence there which will stand his government in good
stead. After a willingness has been expressed by both sides to enter into
discussions, official pourparlers are held in which the terms of the
agreement are discussed and decided upon. Finally the treaty is formally
ratified by the Foreign Ministers or special envoys of the countries
involved. This secrecy in the first two stages is necessitated by the
fear of meddling on the part of other governments, and also by a desire
on the part of any country making overtures to avoid a possible rebuff
from the other; and it explains why negotiations which are publicly
entered into never fail.

But to return to my adventures. My Government had learned of the
impending pourparlers between Britain and Russia; it knew that Baron
B——’s instructions would contain the conditions which Russia considered
desirable. What was necessary was to secure these instructions.

Now, my tutor had, long before this, seen to it that I should be on
friendly terms with various members of the baron’s household; and he had
been especially insistent that I pay a good deal of attention to the
young daughter of the house, whom I shall call Nevshka. I had wondered
at the time why he should do this; but I obeyed his instructions with
alacrity. Nevshka was charming.

Now I saw the purpose of this carefully fostered friendship.

“The baron will spend this evening at the club,” I was informed. “He
will return, according to his habit, promptly at twelve. You will visit
his house this evening, paying a call upon Nevshka. You will contrive
to set back the clock so that his home coming will be in the nature
of a surprise to her. The hour will be so late that she, knowing her
father’s strictness, will contrive to get you out of the house without
his seeing you. That is your opportunity! You must slip from the salon
into the rear hall—but do not leave the house. And if, young man, with
such an opportunity, you cannot discover where these papers are hidden
_and secure them_, you are unworthy of the trust that your government has
placed in you.”

I nodded my comprehension. In other words I was to take advantage of
Nevshka’s friendship in order to steal from her father—I was to perform
an act from which no gentleman could help shrinking. And I was going to
do it with no more qualms of conscience than, in time of war, I should
have felt about stealing from an enemy general the plan of an attack.

For countries are always at war—diplomatically. There is always a
conflict between the foreign ambitions of governments; always an attempt
on the part of each country to gain its own ends by fair means or foul.
Every man engaged in diplomatic work knows this to be true. And he
will serve his government without scruple, for well he knows that some
seemingly dishonorable act of his may be the means of averting that
actual warfare which is only the forlorn hope that governments resort to
when diplomatic means of mastery have failed.

So I undertook my mission with no hesitation, rather with a thrill
of eagerness. I pretended to be violently interested in Nevshka (no
difficult task, that) and time sped by so merrily that even had I not
turned back the hands of the clock, I doubt if the lateness of the hour
would have seriously concerned either of us. Oh, yes, my tutor—who, as
you of course have guessed by now, was no mere tutor—had analyzed the
situation correctly.

As the baron was heard at the door, I drew out my watch.

“Nevshka, your clock is slow. It is already midnight.”

Nevshka started.

“Come!” she exclaimed. “Father must not see you. He would be furious at
your being here at this hour.” In a panic she glanced about the salon.
“Go out that way.” And she pointed to a door at the rear, one that opened
on a dimly lit hallway.

I went. I heard the baron express his surprise that Nevshka was still
awake. I heard her lie—beautifully, I assure you. And I remained hidden
while the baron worked in his library for a while; hardly daring to
breathe until I heard him go up the stairs to his bedroom.

He was a careless man, the baron. Or perhaps he had been reading Poe,
and believed that the most obvious place of concealment was the safest.
At any rate, there in a drawer of his desk, protected only by the most
defenseless of locks, were the papers—a neat statement of the terms upon
which Russia would discuss this Persian matter with England.

I returned home with my prize, to find my tutor awaiting me. He said
no word of commendation when I gave him the papers, but I knew by his
expression that he was well pleased with my work. And I went to bed,
delighted with myself, and dreaming of the great things that were to come.

The next day we left Petersburg. A German resident of the city had
telephoned my relatives, warning them that a few cases of cholera had
appeared. Would it not, he suggested (Oh, it was mere kind thoughtfulness
on his part) be best to let the young prince return to Germany until the
danger was over? His parents would be worried. Indeed, it would be best,
my “relatives” agreed. So with regret they bade leave of me; and in the
most natural manner in the world I returned to Berlin.

Wilhelmstrasse 76 again! The round-faced man again, but this time less
military, less unbending, in his manner. I had done well, he told me.
My exploit had attracted the favorable attention of a very exalted
personage. If I could hold my tongue—who knows what might be in store for
me?

       *       *       *       *       *

That was the end of the matter, so far as I was concerned. But in the
history of European politics it was only the beginning of the chapter.

It might be well, at this point, to recall the political situation
in Europe, as it affected England, Russia and Germany at this time.
Even two years before—in 1905—it had become evident to all students of
international affairs that the next great conflict, whenever it should
come, would be between England and Germany; and England realizing this,
had already begun to seek alliances which would stand between her and
German ambitions of world dominance. The Entente with France had been
the first step in the formation of protective friendships; and although
this friendship had suffered a strain during the Russo-Japanese War,
because of the opposing sympathies of the two countries, the end of the
war healed all differences. The defeat of Russia removed all immediate
danger of a Slavic menace against India. To England, then, the weakened
condition of Russia offered an excellent opportunity for an alliance that
would draw still more closely the “iron ring around Germany.” Immediately
she took the first steps leading toward this alliance.

Now, Russia stood badly in need of two things. War-torn and threatened by
revolution, the government could rehabilitate itself only by a liberal
amount of money. But where to get it? France, her ally, and normally
her banker, was slow, in this instance to lend—and it was only through
England’s intervention that the Czar secured from a group of Paris and
London bankers the money with which to finance his government and defeat
the revolution.

But more than money, Russia needed an ice-free seaport to take the
place of Port Arthur, which she had lost; and for this there were only
two possible choices: Constantinople or a port on the Persian Gulf. In
either of these aims she was opposed by Britain, the traditional enemy
of a Russian Constantinople, on the one hand, and the possessor of a
considerable “sphere of interest” in the Persian Gulf on the other.

So matters stood, when in August, 1907, _but a few weeks after my
masquerade_, Sir Arthur Nicholson, acting for England, and Alexander
Iswolsky, acting for Russia, signed the famous Anglo-Russian Agreement,
providing for the distribution of Persia into three strips, the northern
and southern of which would be respectively Russian and British zones of
influence; providing also, in a secret clause, that _Russia would give
England military aid in the event of a war between Germany and England_!

Meantime what was Germany doing?

She had, you may be sure, no intention of allowing England to best her
in the game of intrigue. Her interests in the Near East were commercial
rather than military; but she could not see them threatened by an
Anglo-Russian occupation of Persia, such as the Agreement portended.
Then, too, she was bound to consider the possible effect on Turkey, in
whom she was taking an ever-increasing (and none too altruistic) interest.

The details of what followed I can only surmise. I know that in the time
between my trip to Russia and the signing of that Agreement, on August
31, the Kaiser held two conferences: one on August 3, with the Czar at
Swinemunde; the other on August 14, with Edward VII, at the Castle of
Wilhelmshohe. And when, on September 24th, the terms were published, they
were bitterly attacked by a portion of the English press, not so much
because of the danger to Persia, as because of the fact that Russia got
the best of the bargain![1]

Had the Kaiser succeeded in having these terms changed? Who knows?
Certainly one can trace the hand of German diplomacy in the events of
the next seven years, most of which are a matter of common knowledge.
The steady aggressions of Russia in Persia during the troubled years of
1910-1912; the almost open flouting of the terms of the treaty, which
expressly guaranteed Persian integrity; the constant growth of German
influence, culminating in the Persian extension of the German-owned
Bagdad Railway; the founding of a German school and a hospital in
Teheran, jointly supported by Germany and Persia; and finally, the
celebrated Potsdam Agreement of 1910, between Russia and Germany, in
which Germany agreed to recognize Russia’s claim to Northern Persia as
its sphere of influence, which provided for a further rapprochement
between the two countries in the matter of railroad construction and
commercial development generally, and which has been generally supposed
to contain a guarantee that neither country would join “any combination
of Powers that has any aggressive tendency against the other.”

And England did not protest, in spite of the fact that the Potsdam
Agreement absolutely negatived her own treaty with Russia and made it,
in the language of one writer, “a farce and a deception!” Why? Was it
because she believed that when war came, as it inevitably must, Russia
would forget this new alliance in allegiance to the old?

England was mistaken, if she believed so. Russia—Imperial Russia—was
never so much the friend of Germany as when, neglecting the war on her
own Western front, she sent her armies into the Caucasus, persuaded the
British to undertake the Dardanelles expedition, and, following her own
plans of Asiatic expansion, betrayed England!

As I write this the Kut el Amara muddle is creating a great stir in the
allied countries. Lord Hardinge, Viceroy of India, and the government
of India have been severely blamed for sending General Townsend into
Mesopotamia with insufficient material, medical supplies and troops. At
the time that the move was made the explanation given for it was that it
was done in order to protect the oil pipes supplying the British navy
in those waters from being destroyed by the enemy. There was no doubt
in my mind at that time, in spite of the fact that I was in prison and
communication with the outside was very meagre, that this was not the
real reason. Subsequent developments have shown—and the abandonment of
the inquiry instituted by the British Government about this affair only
further supports my contention—that Russia intended to use England’s
helpless position to secure for herself an access to the Persian Gulf.
Grand Duke Nicholas himself abandoned the campaign on the Eastern front
to go to the Caucasus. The Gallipoli enterprise which turned out to be
such a monumental failure was undertaken upon his instigation. Do you
think for one second that if Imperial Russia had thought England was able
to capture Constantinople, a city which she herself has been wanting for
centuries, she would have invited England to do so? The fact is that
the Gallipoli enterprise tied up all of England’s available reserves so
that the English could practically do nothing to forestall the Russian
movements to the Persian Gulf. The Government of India, realizing the
danger, sent General Townsend upon the famous Bagdad campaign rather as a
demonstration, than as a military enterprise. I will quote from my diary
which I kept while in prison.

“Just read in _The Times_: ‘British moving north into Mesopotamia to
protect oil pipes and capture Bagdad.’ I don’t need to read _Punch_ any
more, _The Times_ being just as funny. My dear friends, you didn’t move
up there for that reason. You went up there so as to be able to tell
your Russian friends that there was no need to come further south as you
were there already.”

[Illustration: Raul Madero and Staff. Captain von der Goltz is standing
the second from the left.]

[Illustration: A group of recruits who came from the United States to
enter Villa’s Army. Captain von der Goltz is at the extreme left.]

As part of the Russian Army had already advanced as far as Kermansha,
General Townsend disregarded all military rules and tactics in his
desperate attempt to keep the Russians from going further South, paying
very little attention to securing his line of communication, and he was
subsequently cut off from his base and forced to surrender to the Turks.

In the early part of the war Russia did not try to gain anything at
the expense of Germany but consistently applied herself to the task of
enriching herself at the expense of England. Imperial Russia as an ally
has constantly been fighting England and done the Allied cause more
damage than the German army.

But Imperial Russia wrote her own death sentence by her treachery. There
was a revolution in Russia ...

But I anticipate.

       *       *       *       *       *

That is the story of my little expedition into Russia—and of what it
brought about.

As for me, I was sent back to Gross Lichterfelde, where I abruptly ceased
to be a young prince, and became once more a humble cadet. But only to
outside eyes. Dazzled by the success of my first mission, I regarded
myself as a superman among the cadets. Life loomed romantically before
me. I told myself that I was to consort with princes and beautiful
noblewomen and to spend money lavishly. The future seemed to promise a
career that was the merriest, maddest, for which a man could hope.

I laugh sometimes now when I think of the dreams I had in those days. I
was soon to learn that the life which fate had thrust upon me was set
with traps and pitfalls which might not easily be escaped. I was to learn
many lessons and to know much suffering; and I was to discover that the
finding of my “document” was only the beginning of a chain of events that
were to control my whole life—and that its influence over my career had
not ended.

But at that time I was all hopes and rosy dreams—of my future, of myself,
occasionally of Nevshka.

Nevshka. Is she still as charming as ever?




CHAPTER III.

    _Of what comes of leaving important papers exposed. I look and
    talk indiscreetly—and a man dies._


In spite of my dreams and extreme self-satisfaction, I found the
atmosphere of Gross Lichterfelde as drab and monotonous as ever it had
been before my masquerade. Discipline sits lightly upon one who is
accustomed to it solely, but to me, fresh from a glorious fortnight of
intrigue and festivity, it was doubly galling. Yet there was one avenue
of escape open to me, that was denied my fellows, for I was required to
pay a weekly visit to my tutor in the Wilhelmstrasse, there to continue
my studies in the art of diplomatic intrigue.

It is a significant comment upon the life at Gross Lichterfelde that I
could regard these visits as a kind of relaxation. Surely no drill-master
was ever so exacting as this tutor of mine. And yet, despite his dryness
and the complete lack of cordiality in his manner, there was somewhere
the gleam of romance about him. To me he seemed, in a strangely
inappropriate way, an incarnation of one of those old masters of intrigue
who had been my heroes in former days at home; and my imagination
distorted him into a gigantic, shadowy being, mysterious, inflexible and
potentially sinister.

We studied history together that autumn; not the dull record of facts
that was forced upon us at Gross Lichterfelde, but rather a history
of glorious national achievement, of ambitions attained and enemies
scattered—a history that had the tone of prophecy. And I would sit there
in the soft autumn sunlight viewing the Fatherland with new eyes; as a
knight in shining armor, beset by foes, but ever triumphing over them by
virtue of his righteousness and strength of arm.

Then I would return to Gross Lichterfelde and its discipline.

Yet even at Gross Lichterfelde, we contrived to amuse ourselves, chiefly
by violating regulations. That is generally the result of walling any
person inside a set of rules; his attention becomes centered on getting
outside. Your own cadets at West Point, so I have been told, have their
traditional list of deviltries, maintained with admirable persistence
in the face of severe penalties. At Gross Lichterfelde one proved his
manliness by breaking bounds at least once a week, to drink beer, and
flirt with maids none the less divine because they were hopelessly
plebian.

In the prevailing lawlessness, I bore my share, and in the course of my
escapades, I formed an offensive and defensive alliance with a cadet of
my own age against that common enemy of all our kind, the Commandant of
the school, Willi von Heiden, I will call my chum, because that was not
his name. We became close friends. And through our friendship there came
an event which I shall remember to my last day. It gave me a glimpse into
the terrible pit of secret diplomacy.

Often at the present, I find myself living it over in my mind. If I
have learned to take a lighter view of life than most men, my attitude
dates from that time when a careless word of mine, spoken in innocence,
condemned a man to death. I will try to tell very briefly how it came
about.

The Christmas after my excursion to St. Petersburg I was invited by Willi
von Heiden to visit him at his home. His father was a squireling of East
Prussia, one of the _Junkers_. He had an estate in that rolling farm land
between Goldap and Tilsit, which was the scene of countless adventures
of Willi’s boyhood.

Just before we left Gross Lichterfelde—yes, even there they allow you a
few days vacation at Christmas—Willi received a letter and came to me
with a joyous face.

“Good news,” he cried, “we are sure to have a lively holiday. Brother
Franz is getting a few days’ leave, too.”

I had heard much of Willi’s older brother, Franz. He was a young man
in the middle twenties, an officer of a famous fighting regiment of
foot, one of the Prussian Guards. Willi had dilated upon him in his
conversation with me. Franz was his younger brother’s hero. From all
accounts Franz von Heiden was possessed of a mind of that rare sort which
combines unremitting industry with cleverness. His future as a soldier
seemed brilliant and assured.

“Where is Franz?” was Willi’s first question when we reached his home.

I shall be long forgetting my first impressions of the man. I had been
looking for a dry, spectacled student, or a stiff young autocrat of the
thoroughly Prussian type, which I, like many other Germans, thoroughly
disliked and inwardly laughed at. Instead, I found another chum. Franz
was an engaging young man of slight build but very vigorous and athletic.
I found him frank, friendly, unassuming, apparently wholly carefree and
full of quiet drollery. From his first greeting any prejudice that I
might have formed from hearing my chum, Willi, chant his excellencies,
was quite wiped away. And as the days passed I found myself drawn to seek
Franz’s company constantly. I have no doubt it flattered my vanity—always
awake since my exploit in St. Petersburg—to find this older man treating
me as a mental equal. It seemed to me that he differentiated between me
and Willi, who was quite young in manner as well as years. At times the
impulse was very strong for me to confide in Franz, to let him know that
I was not a mere cadet, that I had been in Russia for my government.
Luckily for myself I suppressed that impulse. Luckily for me, but very
unluckily for Lieutenant Franz von Heiden—as it turned out.

One sunny December morning we were all three going out rabbit shooting.
While Willi counted out shells in the gun room, I went to summon Franz
from the bedroom he was using as his study. It was characteristic of him
that without any assumption of importance, he gave a few hours to work
early every morning, even while on leave. I found him intent upon some
large sheets of paper, but he pushed them aside.

“Time to start now?” he asked. “Good! Wait a minute, while I dress.” He
stepped into the adjoining dressing-room.

And then, as if Fate had taken a hand in the moment’s activities, I did
a thing which I have never ceased to regret. Fate! Why not? What is
the likelihood that by mere vague chance I, of all the cadets of Gross
Lichterfelde, should have become Willi von Heiden’s chum and shared
his holidays? That by mere chance I should have been an inmate of his
home when Franz was there, three days out of the whole year? That by
mere chance, I, with my precocious knowledge and thirst for yet more
knowledge, should have entered his study when he was occupied with a
particular task? Why did I not send the servant to call him? And why,
instead of doing any one of the dozen other things I might have done
while I was waiting for Franz to change his clothes, should I have
stepped across and looked at the big sheets of paper on his table?

I did just that. I did it quite frankly and without a thought of prying.
I saw that the sheets were small scale maps. They were the maps of a
fort and the names upon them were written both in French and in German.
The thrill of a great discovery shot all through me. It flashed upon
me that I had heard Willi say that during the previous summer Franz
had spent a long furlough in the Argonne section of France. He had
been fishing and botanizing—so Willi had said. Indeed, only the night
before Franz himself had told us stories of the sport there; and all
his family had accepted the stories at their face value. So had I until
that moment when I stood beside his desk and saw the plans of a French
field fortress. Then I knew the truth. Lieutenant Franz von Heiden was
doing important work—so confidential that even his family must be kept in
ignorance about it—for the intelligence department of the German General
Staff. Like me, he was entitled to the gloriously shameful name of spy!

If I had obeyed my natural impulse to rush into Franz’s room and exchange
fraternal greetings with this new colleague of the secret service, so
romantically discovered, he might have saved himself. Instead, something
made me play the innocent and be the innocent, too, as far as intent was
concerned.

When Franz returned, dressed for the shoot, I was standing looking out
of his window, and I said nothing about my discovery.

We had our rabbit shoot that day. We crowded all the fun and energy
possible into it. It was our last day together and by sundown I felt as
close to Franz von Heiden as though he were my own brother. A few days
later Willi and I went back to Gross Lichterfelde.

Shortly after I returned from my Christmas leave, my tutor sent for me.
He even recognized the amenities of the occasion enough to unbend a
little and greeted me with a trace of mechanical friendliness.

“I trust you had a pleasant holiday,” he said, “you told me, did you not,
that you were to spend it at the Baron von Heiden’s?”

That touch of friendliness was the occasion of my tragic error. I
remember that I plunged into a boisterous description of my vacation, of
the pleasant days in the country, of the shooting, of Franz. As my tutor
listened, with a tolerant air, I told him what a splendid fellow Franz
was, how cleverly he talked and how diligently he worked. And then, with
a rash innocence for which I have never forgiven myself, I told him of
what I had seen on that day of the rabbit shooting—of the maps on the
table. Franz was one of us!

But my tutor was not interested. Abruptly he interrupted my burst of
gossip; and soon after that he plunged me into a quiz in spoken French.
My progress in that seemed his only preoccupation.

A month later Willi von Heiden staggered into my room. “Franz is dead,”
he said.

The brilliant young lieutenant, Franz von Heiden, had come to a sudden
and shocking end. He was shot dead in a duel. His opponent was a brother
officer, a Captain von Frentzen. The “Court of honor” of the regiment had
approved of the duel and it was reported that the affair was carried out
in accordance with the German code.

Later I learned the story. Captain von Frentzen was suddenly attached to
the same regiment as Franz. His transfer was a cause of great surprise
to the officers and of deep displeasure to them, for the captain had a
notorious reputation as a duelist. Naturally the officers, Franz among
them, had ignored him, trying to force him out of the regiment. Upon the
night of a regimental dance, the situation came to a head.

In response to the gesture of a lady’s fan Franz crossed the ball room
hurriedly. He was caught in a sudden swirl of dancers and accidentally
stepped on Captain von Frentzen’s foot. In the presence of the
whole company von Frentzen dealt Franz a stinging slap in the face.
“Apparently,” he sneered, “you compel me to teach you manners.” Franz
looked at him, amazed and furious. There was nothing that he had done
which warranted von Frentzen’s action. It was an outrage—a deadly insult.
There was but one thing to do. A duel was arranged.

To understand more of this incident you must understand the unyielding
code of honor of the German officer. Franz von Heiden’s original offense
had been so very slight that even had he refused to apologize to Frentzen
the consequences might not have been serious. But Frentzen’s blow given
in public was quite a different matter. It was a mortal affront. I heard
that Franz’s captain had been in a rage about it.

“My best lieutenant,” he had said to the colonel. “An extremely
valuable man. To be made to fight a duel with that worthless butcher,
von Frentzen. Shameful! God knows that laws are sometimes utterly
unreasonable by many of our ideas, as officers are equally senseless. I
have racked my brain to find a way out of this difficulty, but it seems
impossible. Can’t you do something to interfere?”

The colonel looked at him steadily. “Your honest opinion. Is von Heiden’s
honor affected by Frentzen’s action?”

There was nothing Franz’s captain could do but reply, “Yes.”

The duel was held on the pistol practice grounds of the garrison, a
smooth, grassy place, surrounded by high bushes; at the lower end there
was a shed built of strong boards, in which tools and targets were
stored. At daybreak Franz von Heiden and his second dismounted at the
shed and fastened their horses by the bridle. They stood side by side,
looking down the road, along which a carriage was coming. Captain von
Frentzen, his second, and the regimental surgeon got out. Sharp polite
greetings were exchanged. On the faces of the seconds there was a
singular expression of uneasiness, but Frentzen looked as though he were
there for some guilty purpose. The prescribed attempts at reconciliation
failed. The surgeon measured off the distance. He was a long-legged man
and made the fifteen paces as lengthy as possible.

Just at this moment the sun came up fully. Pistols were loaded and given
to Franz and Frentzen. Fifteen paces apart, the two men faced each
other. One of the seconds drew out his watch, glanced at it and said,
“I shall count; ready, one! then three seconds; two!—and again three
seconds; then, stop! Between one and stop the gentlemen may fire.” He
glanced round once more. The four officers stood motionless in the level
light of the dawn. He began to count. Presently Franz von Heiden was
stretched out upon the ground, his blue eyes staring up into the new day.
He lay still....

When I heard that story I ceased to be a boy. My outlook on the future
had been that of an irresponsible gamester, undergoing initiation into
the gayest and most exciting sports. All at once my eyes were hideously
opened and I looked down into the pit that the German secret service
had prepared for Franz von Heiden, and knew I _was the cause of it_. It
was terrible! By leaving that map where I could see it Franz von Heiden
had been guilty of an unforgivable breach of trust. By his carelessness
he had let someone know that the Intelligence Department of the General
Staff had procured the plans of a French fortress in the Argonne.
Wherefore, according to the iron law of that soulless war machine, Franz
von Heiden must die.

And this is the sinister way it works. Trace it. I innocently betray him
to my tutor, an official of the Secret Diplomatic Service. A few days
later one of the deadliest pistol shots in the German army is transferred
to Franz’s regiment. A duel is forced upon him and he is shot down in
cold blood.

Not long after the news of the duel, my tutor sent for me. “Is it not
a curious coincidence,” he began, his cold gray eyes boring into mine,
“that the last time you were here we spoke of Lieutenant Franz von
Heiden? The next time you come to see me he is dead. I understand that
certain rumors are in circulation about the way he died. Some of them may
have already come to your attention. I caution you to pay no attention
whatever to such silly statements. Remember that a Court of Honor of
an honorable regiment of the Prussian Guards has vouched for the fact
that Lieutenant von Heiden’s quarrel with Captain von Frentzen and the
unfortunate duel that followed was conducted in accordance with the
officers’ code of the Imperial Army.”

I hung my head, sick at heart; but he was relentless.

“Remember also,” he said in a pitiless voice, “that men of intelligence
never indulge in fruitless gossip, even among themselves. I hope you
understand that—by now.” He paused a moment, as if he remembered
something.

“For some time,” he went on, in the most casual way, “I have been aware
that it will be necessary for me to talk to you seriously. Now is as good
a time as any. You know that your training for your future career has
been put largely in my hands. I am responsible for your progress. The men
who have made me responsible require reports about your development. They
have not been wholly satisfied with what I was able to tell them. Your
intentions are good. You show a certain amount of natural cleverness and
adaptability, but you have also disappointed them by being impulsive and
indiscreet.

“Now,” he said, “I ask you to pay the closest attention to everything I
shall say. Your attitude must be changed if you are to go on, and some
day be of service to your government. You must learn to treat your work
as a deadly serious business—not as a romantic adventure. We were just
speaking of von Heiden. I seem to remember vaguely that the last time you
were here you had some sort of a cock-and-bull story to tell me of—what
was it?—of seeing some secret maps of French fortifications on the
unfortunate young man’s table. I could hardly refrain from smiling at the
time. Such poppycock! You do not imagine for a moment, do you, that if
he had proved himself discreet enough to be intrusted with such highly
confidential things, he would have been so imprudent as to betray that
fact to a mere casual friend of his little brother? I hope you see how
absurd such imaginings are.”

I groaned mentally as he continued.

“Remember now,” my tutor said icily, “every man in our profession is a
man who not only knows very much, but may know too much, unless he can be
trusted to keep what he knows to himself. There are three ways in which
he can fail to do that—by carelessness, by accident, and by deliberate
talking. Never talk—never be careless—never have accidents happen to
you. Then you will be safe, and in no other way can you be so safe. Keep
that in your mind. You will find it much more profitable and useful than
remembering what anybody has to say about Franz von Heiden. It was a
commonplace quarrel with Captain von Frentzen which killed him. A court
of honor has said so.”

That night at Gross Lichterfelde, after lights were out, Willi von Heiden
came creeping to my bed. I was the only intimate friend he had there
and he felt the need of talking with some one about the big brother who
had been his hero. Need I go into details of how his artless confidence
made me feel? But human beings are exceedingly selfish and self-centered
creatures. I had a heart-felt sorrow for my chum and his family in their
tragic bereavement. And, blaming myself as I did for it, I was abased
completely. Yet there was another feeling in me at least as deeply rooted
as those two emotions. It was dread.

Dread was to follow me for many years. I had learned the dangers of the
dark secret world in which I lived. Its rules of conduct and its ruthless
code had been revealed to me, not merely by precept but by example.
And with that realization all the thrill of romance and adventure
disappeared. For I knew that I, too, might at any time be counted among
the men who “knew too much.”




CHAPTER IV.

    _I am sent to Geneva and learn of a plot. How there are more
    ways of getting rid of a King than by blowing him up with
    dynamite._


If at any time in this story of my life, I have given the impression
that accident did not play a very important part in the work of myself
and other secret agents, I have done so unintentionally. “If” has been
a big word in the history of the world; and even in my small share of
the events of the last ten years, chance has oftentimes been a more
able ally than some of the best laid of my plans. If, for instance,
I had not happened to be in Geneva in the winter of 1909-10; or if a
certain official of the Russian secret police—the _Okrana_—had not met
a well-deserved death at the hands of a committee of “Reds”; or if the
German Foreign Office had not been playing a pretty little game of
diplomacy in the Southwestern corner of Europe—why, the world to-day
would be poorer by a King, and possibly richer by another combatant in
the Great War.

And if another King had not kept a diary he might have kept his throne.
And if both he and a certain young diplomat, whose name I think it best
to forget, had not had a common weakness for pretty faces, Germany would
have lost an opportunity to gain some information that was more or less
useful to her, an actress whose name you all know would never have become
internationally famous, and this book would have lost an amusing little
comedy of coincidences.

All of which sounds like romance and is—merely the truth.

I had spent two uneventful years at Gross Lichterfelde at the time the
comedy began; two years of study in which I had acquired some knowledge
and a great weariness of routine, of hard work unpunctuated by any
element of adventure. Of late it had almost seemed as if, after all, it
was planned that I should become merely one of the vast army of officers
that Gross Lichterfelde and similar schools were yearly turning out. For
such a fate, as you can imagine, I had little liking.

Consequently I was far from displeased when one day I received a
characteristically brief note from my old tutor, asking me to call upon
him. Still more was I elated when, the next day, he informed me that I
had enough of books for the time being, and that he thought a little
practical experience would be good for me. A vacation, I might call it,
if I wished—with a trifle of detective work thrown in.

H’m. I was not so delighted with that prospect, and when the details of
the “vacation” were explained to me, I was strongly tempted to say no to
the entire proposition. But one does not say no to my old tutor. And so,
in the course of a week, I found myself spending my evenings in the _Café
de l’Europe_ in Geneva, bound on a still hunt for Russian revolutionists.

Russia, at this time, had not quite recovered from the fright she
received in 1905 and 1906, when, as you will remember, popular discontent
with the government had assumed very serious proportions. “Bloody
Sunday,” and the riots and strikes that followed it, were far in the
past now, it is true, but they were still well remembered. And although
most of the known revolutionary leaders had been disposed of in one way
or another, there were still a few of them, as well as a large number
of their followers, wandering in odd corners of Europe. These it was
thought best to get rid of; and Russian agents promptly began ferreting
them out. And Germany—always less unfriendly to the Romanoffs than has
appeared on the surface—lent a helping hand.

So it happened that on a particular night in December of 1909, I sat in
the _Café de l’Europe_, bitterly detesting the work I had in hand, yet
inconsistently wishing that something would turn up. I had no idea at the
moment of what I should do next. Chance rumor had led me to Geneva, and I
was largely depending upon chance for further developments.

They came. I had been sitting for an hour I suppose, sipping vermouth and
lazily regarding my neighbors, when the sound of a voice came to my ears.
It was the voice of a man speaking French, with the soft accent of the
Spaniard; the tone loud and unsteady and full of the boisterous emphasis
of a man in his cups. But it was the words he spoke that commanded my
attention.

“Our two comrades,” he was saying, “will soon arrive from the center in
Buenos Ayres.”

“Yes,” another voice assented—a harsher voice, this, to whose owner
French was obviously also a foreign tongue. “In the spring, we hope.”

[Illustration: The Brevet promoting Senior Captain von der Goltz to the
rank of Major of Cavalry in the Mexican Constitutionalist Army. It will
be noted that the commission bears the signature of Raul Madero and
General Villa.]

The Spaniard laughed.

“An excellent business! So simple. _Boom!_ And our dear Alfonso....”

Some element of caution must have come over him, for his voice sank so
that I could no longer hear his words. But I had heard enough to make me
assume a good deal.

Some one was to be assassinated! And that some one? It was a guess, of
course, but the name and the accent of the speaker were more than enough
to lead me to believe that the proposed victim must be King Alfonso of
Spain.

I sat there, undecided for the moment. It was really no affair of
mine. I was on another mission, and, after all, my theory was merely
a supposition. On the other hand, the situation presented interesting
possibilities—and as I happened to know, Alfonso’s seemingly pro-German
leanings and made him an object of friendly interest at that time to my
government.

I decided to look into the matter.

It had been difficult to keep from stealing a glance at my talkative
neighbors but I restrained myself. I must not turn around and yet it was
vitally necessary that I see their faces. All I could do was to hope that
they would leave before I finished my vermouth; for I had no mind to
risk my clear-headedness with more than the glass I had already had.

They did leave shortly afterward. As they passed my table I took care to
study their faces, and my intention to keep them in sight was immensely
strengthened. The Spaniard I did not know, but his companion I recognized
as a Russian—_and one of the very men I was after_.

I had been in Geneva long enough to know where I could get information
when I needed it. It was only a day or two, therefore, before I had in
my hands sufficient facts to justify me in reporting the matter to my
government.

Alfonso was in England at the time and presumably safe; for I had
gathered that no attempt would be made upon his life until he returned to
Spain. So I wrote to Berlin reporting what I had learned.

A telegram reached me next day. I was ordered to Brussels to communicate
my information to the Spanish Minister there.

Mark that: I was ordered to Brussels, although there was a Spanish
Minister in Switzerland. But my government knew that there were many
factions in Spain, and it had strong reasons to believe that the Spanish
Minister to Belgium was absolutely loyal to Alfonso. And in a situation
such as this, one takes as few chances as possible.

I followed my instructions. The Spanish Minister thanked me. He was more
than interested; and he begged me, since I had no other direct orders,
to do him the personal favor of staying a few days longer in the Belgian
capital. I did so, of course, and a day or so later received from my
government instructions to hold myself at the Spaniard’s disposal for the
time being.

That night, at the minister’s request, I met him and we discussed the
matter fully. He wished me, he said, to undertake a more thorough
investigation of the plot. I was already involved in it, and would be
working less in the dark than another. Besides, he hinted, he could not
very well employ an agent of his own government. Who knew how far the
conspiracy extended?

I was not displeased to abandon my chase of the Russian revolutionaries,
toward whom I felt some sympathy. So, as a preliminary step, I went up
to Paris, where through the good offices of one Carlos de Silva—a young
Brazilian free-thinker, who was there ostensibly as a student—I succeeded
in gaining admission into one of the fighting organizations of radicals
there. They were not so communicative as I could have wished, but by
judicious pumping I soon learned that there was an organized conspiracy
against the life of Alfonso, and that the details of the plot were in the
hands of a committee in Geneva.

Geneva, then, was my objective point. But what to do if I went there? I
knew very well that conspirators do not confide their plans to strangers.
And I dared not be too inquisitive. Obviously the only course to follow
was to employ an agent.

Now, _Cherchez la femme_ is as excellent a principle to work on when you
are choosing an accomplice, as it is when you are seeking the solution of
a crime. I therefore proceeded to seek a lady—and found her in the person
of a pretty little black-eyed “revolutionist,” who called herself Mira
Descartes, and with whom I had already had some dealings.

It is here that accident crosses the trail again. For if a certain
official of the _Okrana_ had not been murdered in Moscow three years
before, his daughter would never have conceived an intense hatred of all
revolutionary movements and I should have been without her invaluable
assistance in the adventure I am describing.

Mira Descartes! She was the kind of woman of whom people like to say that
she would have made a great actress. Actress? I do not know. But she was
an artist at dissembling. And she had beauty that turned the heads of
more than the “Reds” upon whom she spied; and a genius for hatred: a cold
hatred that cleared the brain and enabled her to give even her body to
men she despised in order the better to betray them.

I was fortunate in securing her aid, I told myself; and I did not
hesitate to use her services. (For in my profession, as must have been
apparent to you, scrupulousness must be reserved for use “in one’s
private capacity as a gentleman.”)

So Mlle. Descartes went to Geneva, and armed with my previously acquired
information and her own charms, she contrived to get into the good graces
of the committee there, and surprised me a week later by writing to Paris
that she had already contracted a liaison with the Spaniard whom I had
overheard speaking that night in the _Café de l’Europe_.

Soon I had full information about the entire plot. It was planned, I
learned, to blow up King Alfonso with a bomb upon the day of his return
to Madrid. The work was in the hands of two South Americans who were then
in Geneva.

But far more important than this was the information which Mlle.
Descartes had obtained that a high official of Spain—a member of the
Cabinet—was cognizant of the plot and had kept silent about it.

Why, I asked myself, should this official—a man who surely had no
sympathy with the aims of the revolutionists—lend his aid to them in
this plot? The reason was not hard to discover. Alfonso’s position at
the time was far from secure. His government was unpopular at home; and
the pro-Teutonic leanings of many government officials had lost him the
moral and political support of the English government and press—a fact of
considerable importance.

So it seemed possible that Alfonso’s reign might not be of long duration.
And the new government? It might be radical or conservative; pro-English
or pro-German. A man with a career did well to keep on friendly terms
with all factions. Thus, I fancied, the Cabinet Minister must have
reasoned. At any rate he said nothing of the plot.

But I went to Brussels and reported all I had learned—and did not forget
to mention the Cabinet Minister’s rumored share in the plot.

There my connection with the affair ceased. But not long after a little
tragi-comedy occurred which was a direct result of my activities. Let me
recall it to you.

On the evening of May 24, 1910, those of the people of Madrid who were
in the neighborhood of that monument which had been raised in memory of
the victims of the attempted assassination of Alfonso, four years before,
were horrified by a tragedy which they witnessed.

There was a sudden commotion in the streets, an explosion, and the
confused sound of a crowd in excitement.

What had happened? Rumor ran wild through the crowd. The King was
expected home that day—he had been assassinated. There had been an
attempted revolution. Nobody knew.

But the next day everybody knew. A bomb had burst opposite the monument—a
bomb that had been intended for the King. One man had been killed; the
man who carried the bomb. But the King had not arrived in Madrid that day
after all.

The police set to work upon the case and presently identified the dead
man as Jose Tasozelli, who recently arrived in Spain from Buenos Ayres.
It was not certain whether he had any accomplices.

And while the police worked, the King, following a secret arrangement
which had been made by the Spanish Minister at Belgium, and of which not
even the Cabinet had been informed—arrived safely and quietly in Madrid;
a day late, but alive.

What became of the Cabinet Minister? There are no autocracies now, and
not even a King may prosecute without proof. So the Minister escaped for
the time being. But it is interesting to remember that this same Minister
was assassinated, not a great while after.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now there are more ways of getting rid of a king than by blowing him
up with dynamite. Foreign Offices are none too squeamish in their
methods, but they do balk at assassination, even if the proposed
victim is a particularly objectionable opponent of their plans. There
is another method which, if it be correctly followed, is every bit as
efficacious.... Again I must refer you to that excellent French proverb:
_Cherchez la femme_.

It would be difficult to estimate properly the part that women have
played in the game of foreign politics. As spies they are invaluable: for
amourous men are always garrulous. But as Enslavers of Kings they are of
even greater service to men who are interested in effecting a change of
dynasty. Even the most loyal of subjects dislikes seeing his King made
ridiculous; and in countries where the line is not too strictly drawn
between the public exchequer and the private resources of the monarch, a
discontented faction may see some connection between excessive taxes and
the jewels that a demi-mondaine wears. Revolutions have occurred for less
than that—as every Foreign Office knows.

I am not insinuating that all royal scandals are to be laid at the door
of international politics. I merely suggest that, given a king who is to
be made ridiculous in the eyes of his subjects, it is a simple matter for
an interested government to see that he is introduced to a lady who will
produce the desired effect. But no diplomat will admit this, of course.
Not, that is, until after he has “retired.”

This brings me to the second act of my comedy.

If I were drawing a map of Europe—a diplomatic map, that is,—as it was in
the years of 1908 to 1910, I should use only two colors, Germany should
be, let us say, black; England red. But the black of Germany should
extend over the surfaces of Austria, Italy and Turkey; while France and
Russia should be crimson. The rest of the continent would be of various
tints, ranging from a discordant combination of red and black, through a
pinkish gray, to an innocuous and neutral white.

In the race to secure protective alliances against the inevitable
conflict, both Germany and England were diligently attempting to color
these indeterminate territories with their own particular hue. Not least
important among the courted nations were Spain and Portugal. Both were
traditionally English in sympathy; both had shown unmistaken signs,
at least so far as the ruling classes were concerned, of transferring
their friendship to Germany. It was inevitable, therefore, that these
two countries should be the scene of a diplomatic conflict which, if not
apparent to the outsider, was fought with the utmost bitterness by both
sides.

Somehow, by good fortune rather than any other agency—Spain had managed
to avoid a positive alliance with either nation. Alfonso was inclined to
be pro-German at that time; but an adroit juggling of the factions in his
kingdom had prevented him from using his influence to the advantage of
Germany.

Portugal was in a different situation. Poorer in resources than her
neighbor, and hampered by the necessity of keeping up a colonial empire
which in size was second only to England’s, she had greater need of
the protection of one of the Powers. Traditionally—and rightly from a
standpoint of self-interest—that Power should have been England. There
were but three obstacles to the continuance of the friendship that had
existed since the Peninsular War—King Manuel, the Queen Mother and the
Church.

Germany seemed all-powerful in the Peninsula in 1908. Alfonso’s
friendship was secured, and the boy king of Portugal was completely under
the thumb of a pro-German mother and a Church which, as between Germany
and England, disliked Germany the less. England realized the situation
and in approved diplomatic fashion set about regaining her ascendancy.

But diplomacy failed. At the end of two years Berlin was more strongly
intrenched in Portugal than ever; and England knew that only heroic
measures could save her from a serious diplomatic defeat.

Then Manuel did a foolish thing. He kept a diary.

It was a commonplace diary, as you will remember if you read the parts
of it which were published some time after the revolution which
dethroned its author. The outpourings of a very undistinguished young
man—conceited, self-indulgent, petulant—it gained distinction only as the
revelation of an unkingly person’s thoughts on himself in particular and
women in multitudes. But there were portions of it—many of them never
published—which expressed unmistakably Manuel’s anti-English feeling and
his affection for Germany.

_Somehow England came into possession of the diary._

Perhaps it was the diary’s revelation of Manuel’s extreme susceptibility
to feminine charms, which suggested the next step. That I cannot tell.
In any event, not long after the diary became a matter of diplomatic
moment, Manuel paid a visit to England, ostensibly in search of a bride.
His search was unsuccessful; but in London he met and promptly became
infatuated with Mlle. Hedwig Navratil—better known as Gaby Deslys.

They chose well who selected the lovely Bohemian as the instrument of
Manuel’s downfall. Young, charming, she had all the qualities which would
appeal to Manuel’s nature. Added to that, it had been rumored that not
long before King Alfonso had shown some interest in her—and Manuel was
easily influenced by the example of his elders.

You remember the rest of the story. Manuel’s frequent visits to Paris,
where Mlle. Gaby was playing; the jewels—bought, it was said, with money
from the public treasury—which he showered upon her; these were the
subjects of countless rumors at the time. Then came reports that the lady
was domiciled in one of the royal palaces. Finally, in September of 1910,
the scandalized and tax-ridden populace of Portugal, learned that Mlle.
Deslys had been “billed” at the Apollo Theatre in Vienna as the “Mistress
of the King of Portugal.”

On October 5th, this same scandalized and tax-ridden populace joined
forces with the revolutionary party—and Manuel fled to England, where
he attended numerous musical comedies and hoped against hope that the
English Government would live up to that provision of the treaty of 1908
which pledged England to aid the Portuguese throne in the event of a
revolution.

But England—remembering the diary—wisely forgot its pledge. And a
Republican government in Portugal looked with suspicion upon the
diplomatic advances of a nation which had been too friendly towards the
exiled king—and became pro-English, as you know.

There ends my comedy. The lady in the case achieved a sudden
international fame and eventually came to America, where, I believe,
she attracted more interest than commendation. But at best, so far as
we are concerned, she is of importance merely as an illustration of how
diplomacy—or chance, if you prefer—combines politics and the woman for
its own purposes.

But there is an amusing epilogue to the affair, which was not without its
importance to the Wilhelmstrasse, and in which I had a small part. To
tell it, I must pass over several months of work of one sort or another,
until I come to the following winter—that of 1911.

I was on a real vacation this time and had selected Nice as an excellent
place in which to spend a few idle but enlivening weeks. The choice was
not a highly original one, but as it turned out, chance seemed to have
had a hand in it after all. Almost the first person I met there was a man
with whom I had been acquainted for several years, and who was destined
to have his share in the events which followed.

People who have visited Europe many times can hardly have avoided
seeing upon one occasion or another, a famous riding troupe who called
themselves the “Bishops.” They were five in number—Old Bishop, his
daughter and her husband, a man named Merrill, and two others—and their
act, which was variously known as “An Afternoon on the Bois de Boulogne,”
“An Afternoon in the Thiergarten,” etc. (depending upon the city in which
they played), was a feature of many of the famous circuses of seven or
eight years ago. At this time they were helping to pay their expenses
through the winter, by playing in a small circus which was one of the
current attractions of Nice.

I had bought horses from old Bishop in the past and knew him for a
man of unusual shrewdness, who besides being the father of a charming
and beautiful daughter, was in himself excellent company; and I was
consequently pleased to run across him and his family at a time when all
my friends seemed to be in some other quarter of the earth. We talked of
horses together and it was suggested that I might care to inspect an Arab
mare, a recent acquisition, of which the old man was immensely proud.

That evening I heard of the arrival in Nice of a young British diplomat,
an undersecretary of one of the embassies, whom, I remembered I had
once met at a hotel in Vienna. I called upon him the following day—but I
did so, not so much to renew our old acquaintance, as because that very
morning I had received a rambling letter from my chief, commenting upon
the imminent arrival of the Englishman and suggesting that I might find
him a pleasant companion during my stay on the Riviera.

More work, in other words. My chief did not waste time in encouraging
purposeless friendships. As I read the letter, it was a hint that the
Englishman had something which Berlin wanted and I was to get it.

It was not difficult to recall myself to the Undersecretary. We became
friendly, and proceeded to “do” Nice together; and in the course of
our excursions we became occasional visitors at the villa of Maharajah
Holkar, who, with his secretary (and his seraglio) lived—and still lives,
for all I know—at 56 Promenade des Anglais.

The Maharajah was at that time an engaging and eccentric old gentleman,
who had been an uncompromising opponent of the English during his youth
in India, and was now practically an exile, spending most of his time in
planning futile conspiracies against the British Government, which he
hated, and making friends with Englishmen toward whom he had no animosity
whatever. He was especially well disposed toward my diplomatic friend,
and the two spent many a riotous evening together over the chess board,
at which the Maharajah was invariably successful.

Meanwhile I made various plans and cultivated the acquaintance of the
Rajah’s secretary. He was a Bengali, who might well have stepped out of
Kipling, so far as his manner went. In character the resemblance was
not so close. I happened to know that he was paid a comfortable amount
yearly by the British Government, to keep them informed of the Rajah’s
movements; and I also happened to know that the German Government paid
him a more comfortable amount for the privilege of deciding just what the
British Government should learn. (I have often wondered whether he shared
the proceeds with the Maharajah, and whether even he knew for whom he was
really working.) The secretary, I decided, might be of use to me.

As it happened, it was the secretary who unwittingly suggested the method
by which I finally gained my object. It was he who commented upon the
diplomat’s intense interest in the Maharajah’s seraglio, giving me a
clue to the character of the Englishman, which was of distinct service.
And it was he who suggested one evening that the three of us—for the
Maharajah was ill at the time—should attend a performance of the circus
in which my friends, the Bishops, were playing.

You foresee the end, no doubt. The diplomat, with his too susceptible
nature, was infatuated by Mlle. Bishop’s beauty and skill. He wished
to meet her, and I, who obligingly confessed that I had had some
transactions with her father, undertook to secure the lady’s permission
to present him to her.

I did secure it, of course, although not without considerable opposition
on the part of all three of the family; for circus people are very
straight-laced. However, by severely straining my purse and my
imagination, I convinced them that they would be doing both a friendly
and a profitable act, by participating in the little drama that I
had planned. Eventually they consented to aid me in discomfiting the
diplomat, whom I represented as having in his possession some legal
papers that really belonged to me, although I could not prove my claim to
them.

You will pardon me if I pass over the events of the next few days, and
plunge directly into a scene which occurred one night, about a week
later, the very night in fact on which the Bishops were to close their
engagement with the little circus in which they were playing. It was in
the sitting-room of the diplomat’s suite at the hotel that the scene took
place; dinner _a deux_ was in progress—and the diplomat’s guest was Mlle.
Bishop, who had indiscreetly accepted the Englishman’s invitation.

Came a knock at the door. Mademoiselle grew pale.

“My husband,” she exclaimed.

Mademoiselle was right. It was her husband who entered—very cold, very
businesslike, and carrying a riding crop in his hand. He glanced at the
man and woman in the room.

“I suspected something of the sort,” he said, in a quiet voice. “You are
indiscreet, Madame. You do not conceal your infidelities with care.” He
took a step toward her, put paused at an exclamation from the Englishman.

“Do not fear, Monsieur—” elaborate irony was in his voice as he addressed
the diplomat—“I shall not harm you. It is with this—lady—only, that I am
concerned. She has, it appears, an inadequate conception of her wifely
duty. I must, therefore, give her a lesson.” As he spoke he tapped his
boot suggestively with his riding whip.

“My only regret,” he continued politely, “is that I must detain you as
a witness of a painful scene, and possibly cause a disturbance in your
room.”

Again he turned toward his wife, who had sat watching him, with a
terrified face. Now as he approached her she burst into tears, and ran to
where the Englishman stood.

“He is going to beat me,” she sobbed. “Help me, for Heaven’s sake. Stop
him. Give him—give him anything.”

But the Englishman did not need to be coached.

“Look here!” he cried suddenly, interposing himself between the husband
and wife. “I’ll give you fifty pounds to get out of here quietly. Good
God, man, you can’t do a thing like this, you know. It’s horrible. And
you have no cause. I give you my word you have no cause.”

He was a pitiable mixture of shame and apprehension as he spoke. But
Merrill looked at him calmly. He was quite unmoved and still polite when
he replied:

“The word of a gentleman, I suppose. No, Monsieur, it is useless to
try to bribe me. It is a great mistake, in fact. Almost—” he paused for
a moment, as if he found it difficult to continue—“almost it makes me
angry.”

He was silent for a space, but when he spoke again it was as if in
response to an idea that had come to him.

“Yes,” he continued. “It does make me angry. Nevertheless, Monsieur, I
shall accept your suggestion. Madame and I will leave quietly, and in
return you shall give us—O, not money—but something that you value very
much.”

He turned to his wife.

“Madame. You will go to Monsieur’s trunk, which is open in the corner,
and remove every article so that I can see it.”

The Englishman started. For a moment it seemed as if he would attack
Merrill, who was the smaller man, but fear of the noise held him back.
Meantime, the woman was riffling the trunk, holding up each object for
her husband’s inspection. The latter stood at the door, his eyes upon
both of the others.

“We are not interested in Monsieur’s clothing,” he said calmly. “What
else is there in the trunk? Nothing? The desk then. Only some papers?
That is a pity. Let me have them, however—all of them. And you may give
me the portfolio that lies on the bureau.”

As he took the packet, the rider turned to the diplomat, who stood as if
paralyzed, in the corner of the room.

“I do not know what is in these papers, Monsieur, but I judge from
your agitation that they are valuable. I shall take them from you as a
warning—a warning to let married women alone in the future. Also I warn
you not to try to bribe a man whom you have injured. You have made me
very angry to-night by doing so.

“Above all,” he added, “I warn you not to complain to the police about
this matter. This is not a pretty story to tell about a man in your
position—and I prepared to tell it. Good night, Monsieur.”

He did not wait to hear the Englishman’s reply.

       *       *       *       *       *

That night, while the two younger members of the Bishop family sped away
on the train—to what place I do not know—and old Bishop expressed great
mystification over their disappearance, I made a little bonfire in my
grate of papers which had once been the property of the diplomat, and
which I knew would be of no interest to my government. There were a few
papers which I did not burn—a memorandum or two, and a bulky typewritten
copy of Manuel’s diary, which I found amusing reading before I took it to
Berlin.

I called upon my English friend the next day but I did not see him. He
had been taken ill, and had been obliged to leave Nice immediately. No,
it was impossible to say what the ailment was.

Ah, well, I thought, as I returned to my room, he would get over it. It
was an embarrassing loss, but not a fatal one; and doubtless he could
explain it satisfactorily at home.

I was sorry for him, I confess. But more than once that day I laughed as
I thought of the scene of last night, as Mlle. Bishop had described it to
me. An old game—but it had worked so easily.

But then, wasn’t it Solomon who complained about the lack of original
material on this globe?

The Diary? I took it to Berlin, as I have said, where it was a matter
of considerable interest. Subsequently it was published, after discreet
editing.

But at that time I was engaged upon a matter of considerably more
importance.




CHAPTER V.

    _Germany displays an interest in Mexico, and aids the United
    States for her own purposes. The Japanese-Mexican treaty and
    its share in the downfall of Diaz._


It was in Paris that my next adventure occurred. I had gone there
following one of those agreeably indefinite conversations with my tutor
which always preceded some especial undertaking. “Why not take a rest
for a few weeks?” he would say. “You have not seen Paris in some time.
You would enjoy visiting the city again—don’t you think so?” And I would
obligingly agree with him—and in due course would receive whatever
instructions were necessary.

It may seem that such methods are needlessly cumbersome and a little too
romantic to be real; but in fact there is an excellent reason for them.
Work such as mine is governed too greatly by emergencies to admit of
definite planning beforehand. A contingency is foreseen—faintly, and
as a possibility only—and it is thought advisable to have a man on the
scene. But until that contingency develops into an assured fact, it would
be the sheerest waste of energy to give an agent definite instructions
which might have to be changed at any moment.

[Illustration: General Villa and Colonel Trinidad Rodriguez, von der
Goltz’s commanding officer.]

[Illustration: General Raul Madero, the brother of the murdered President
of Mexico.]

So I had become accustomed to receive my instructions in hints and stingy
morsels, understanding perfectly that it was part of my task to discover
for myself the exact details of the situation which confronted my
government. If I were not sufficiently astute to perceive for myself many
things which my superiors would never tell me—well, I was in the wrong
profession, and the sooner I discovered it the better.

I went to Paris in just that way and put up at the Grand Hotel. So far as
I knew I was on genuine leave of absence from all duties and I proceeded
to amuse myself. Though under no obligations to report to anyone, I did
occasionally drop around to the Quai d’Orsay—where most of the embassies
and consulates are—to chat with men I knew. One day it was suggested
to me at the Germany Embassy that I lunch alone the next day at a
certain table in the Café Americaine. “I would suggest,” said one of the
secretaries, “that you wear the black derby you have on. It is quite
becoming,”—this with an expressionless face. “I would suggest also that
you hang it on the wall behind your table, not checking it. Take note of
the precise hook upon which you hang it. It may be that there will be a
man at the next table who also will be wearing a black derby hat, which
he will hang on the hook next to yours. When you go out be careful to
take down his hat instead of your own.”

I asked no questions. I knew better. Old and well known as it is, the
“hat trick” is perennially useful. Its very simplicity makes it difficult
of detection. It is still the best means of publicly exchanging documents
between persons who must not be seen to have any connection with each
other.

I went to the Café Americaine, that cosmopolitan place on the Boulevard
des Italiens near the opera. My man had not yet come, I noticed, and I
took my time about ordering luncheon, drank a “bock” and watched the
crowd. Near by was a party of Roumanians, offensively boisterous, I
thought. An American was lunching with a dancer then prominent at the
Folies. Two Englishmen—obviously officers on leave—chatted at another
table, and in a corner, a group of French merchants heatedly discussed
some business deal. The usual scene ... almost commonplace in its variety.

Slowly I finished luncheon, and when I turned to get my hat, I saw, as
I expected, that there was another black derby beside it. I took the
stranger’s derby, and when I reached my room in the Grand Hotel I lifted
up the sweatband. There on thin paper were instructions that took my
breath away. For the time being I was to be in charge of the “Independent
Service” of the German Government in Paris—that is, the Strong Arm Squad.

This so-called “Independent Service” is an interesting organization of
cut-throats and thieves whose connection with diplomatic undertakings
is of a distinctly left-handed sort, and is, incidentally, totally
unsuspected by the members of the organization themselves. Composed of
the riff-raff of Europe—of men and women who will do anything for a
consideration and ask no questions—it is frequently useful when subtler
methods have failed and when by violence only can some particular thing
be accomplished. As an organization the “Independent Service” does not
actually exist: the name is merely a generic one applied for convenience
to the large number of people in all great cities who are available
for such work, and who, if they fail and are arrested or killed, can be
spared without risk or sorrow.

Naturally in illegal operations the trail must not lead to the embassy;
and for that reason all transactions with members of the “Service”
are carried on through a person who has no known connection with the
Government. To his accomplices the Government agent is merely a man who
has come to them with a profitable suggestion. They do not question his
motives if his cash be good.

My connection with this delightful organization necessitated a change of
personality. I went round to the Quai d’Orsay and paid a few farewell
calls to my friends there. I was going home, I said; and that afternoon
the Grand Hotel lost one guest and _Le Lapin Agile_ on the hill of
Montmartre gained a new one. Acting under instructions I had become a
social outcast myself.

The place where I had been told to stay had been a tavern for centuries.
Once it was called the _Cabaret of the Assassins_, then the _Cabaret of
the Traitor_, then _My Country Place_ and now, after fifty years, it was
_The Sprightly Rabbit_. André Gill had painted the sign of the tavern, a
rabbit which hung in the street above the entrance. After I had taken my
room—being careful to haggle long about the price, and finally securing a
reduction of fifty centimes—for one does well to appear poor at _Le Lapin
Agile_—I came down into the cabaret. It was crowded and the air was thick
and warm with tobacco smoke. Disreputable couples were sitting around
little wooden tables, drinking wretched wine from unlabeled bottles;
an occasional shout arose for “tomatoes,” a specialty of Frederic, the
proprietor, which was, in reality, a vile brew of absinthe and raspberry
syrup. There was much shouting and once or twice one of the company burst
into song.

“Tomatoes,” I told the waiter who came for my order. As he went I slipped
a franc into his hand. “I want to see _The Salmon_. Is he in?”

He nodded.

A moment later a man stood before me. I saw a short, rather thick-set
fellow, awkward but wiry, whose face bore somewhere the mark of a
forgotten Irish ancestor. He was red-haired. I did not need his words to
tell me who he was.

“I am _The Salmon_,” he said. “What do you want?”

I studied him carefully before replying, appraising him as if he were a
horse I contemplated buying. It was not tactful or altogether safe, as
_The Salmon’s_ expression plainly showed; but I wished to be sure of my
man. After a moment:

“Sit down, my friend,” I told him. “I have a business proposition to
make. M. Morel sent me to you.”

He smiled at the name. The fictitious M. Morel had put him in the way of
several excellent “business propositions.”

“It is a pleasure,” responded _The Salmon_. “What does Monsieur wish?”

I told him....

In order to make you understand the business I was on, it is necessary
that I pause here, abandoning _The Salmon_ for the moment, and recall to
your memory a few facts about the political situation as it existed in
this month of February, 1911. Europe at the time was alull—to outward
seeming. As everybody knows now the forces that later brought about the
War were then merrily at work, as indeed they had been for many years.
But outwardly, save for the ever impending certainty of trouble in the
Balkans, the world of Europe was at peace.

But in America a storm was brewing. Mexico, which for so many years had
been held at peace under the iron dictatorship of Diaz, was beginning
to develop symptoms of organized discontent. Madero had taken to the
field, and although no one at the time believed in the ultimate success
of the rebellion, it was evident that many changes might take place in
the country, which would seriously affect the interests of thousands
of European investors in Mexican enterprises. Consequently Europe was
interested.

I do not purpose here to go into the events of those last days of Diaz’s
rule. That story has already been told, many times and from various
angles. I am merely interested in the European aspects of the matter, and
particularly in the attitude of Germany.

Europe was interested, as I have said. Diaz was growing old and could
certainly not last much longer. Then change must come. Was the Golden
Age of the foreign investor, which had so long continued in Mexico, to
continue still longer? Or would it end with the death of the Dictator?

To these questions, which were having their due share of attention in
the chancellories as well as in the commercial houses of Europe, came
another, less apparent but more troublesome and more insistent than any
of these. Japan, it was rumored, although very faintly, was seeking
to add to its considerable interest in Mexico, by securing a strip of
territory on the western coast of that country—an attempt which, if
successful, would almost certainly bring about intervention by the United
States.

My government was especially interested in this movement on the part
of Japan. It knew considerably more about the plan than any save the
principals, for, as I happened to learn later on, it had carefully
encouraged the whole idea—for its own purposes. And it knew that at that
very time, the financial minister of Mexico, Jose Yves Limantour, was
conducting preliminary negotiations in Paris with representatives of
Japan, regarding the terms of a possible treaty. It knew that even then a
protocol of this treaty was being drawn up.

There was only one thing that my government wanted—a copy of the
protocol. It was that which I had been instructed to get!

The personality of Limantour is one of the most interesting of our day.
Brilliant, incorruptible, unquestionably the most able Mexican of his
generation, he had for seventeen years been closely associated with the
dictator, and for a considerable portion of that period had been second
only to Diaz in actual power. His presence in Paris at this time was
significant. He had left Mexico on the 11th of July, 1910, ostensibly
because of the poor health of his wife, although it had been reported
that a serious break had taken place between himself and Diaz. He had
spent a certain amount of time in Switzerland, and had later come to
Paris to arrange a loan of more that $100,000,000 with a group of
English, French and German bankers. But that task had been completed
in the early part of December, and in view of the unsettled conditions
in Mexico, there was no good reason for his continuing in Paris, save
one—the negotiations with Japan.

It was this man against whom I was to fight—this man who had proven
himself more than a match for some of the best brains of both continents.
The prospect was not reassuring. I knew that already several attempts
had been made by our agents to secure the protocol, with the result that
Limantour was sure to be more on his guard than he ordinarily would have
been. Yet I _must_ succeed—and it was plain that I could do so only by
violence.

Violence it should be, then; and with the assistance of my friend _The
Salmon_—to whom, you may be sure, I did not confide my real object—I
prepared a plan of campaign, which we duly presented to a group of
_The Salmon’s_ friends, who had been selected to assist us. To these
men—Apaches, every one of them—I was presented as a decayed gentleman
who for reasons of his own had found it necessary to join the forces of
_The Salmon_. I was a good fellow, _The Salmon_ assured them, and by way
of proving my friendship I had shared with him my knowledge of a good
“prospect” whom I had discovered.

“The man,” I said, “always carries lots of money and jewelry.” Of course
I did not tell them his name was Limantour. I said he always played cards
late at the club. “To stick him up,” I said, “will be the simplest thing
in the world, but we must be careful not to hurt him badly—not enough to
set the police hot on our trail.” The Apaches fell in with the proposal
enthusiastically. We would attempt it the following night.

Now the instructions which came to me under the sweatband of the
black derby in the Café Americaine informed me that every night quite
late Limantour received at the club a copy of the report of the day’s
conference with the Japanese envoy. It was prepared and delivered
to Limantour by his secretary and it was his habit to study it, upon
returning home, and plan out his line of attack for the negotiations of
the following day. I concluded that Limantour therefore would have it
(the report) on his person when he left the club.

Accordingly I had my Apaches waiting in the shadows. There were five
of us. Limantour started to walk home, as I knew he was frequently in
the habit of doing. We followed and in the first quiet street that he
ventured down, he was blackjacked. In his pockets we found a little money
and some papers, one glance of which assured me were of no value.

My carefully planned _coup_ had failed. You can imagine how I felt about
such a fiasco and how very quickly I had to think. Here was my first big
chance and I had thoroughly and hopelessly bungled it. Limantour was
already stirring. The blow he had received had purposely been made light.
If he recovered to find himself robbed merely of an insignificant sum of
money and some papers his suspicions would be aroused. I could not hope
for another chance at him. I knew that Limantour was too clever not to
sense something other than ordinary robbery in such an attack upon him.
Furthermore my Apaches had to be bluffed and deceived as thoroughly as
he was. I had promised them a victim who carried loads of money and at
the few coins they had obtained there was much growling. Luckily I had a
flash of sense. I resolved to turn the mishap to my advantage.

“We hit the wrong night, that’s all,” I muttered. “You take the coins and
get away. I am going to try to fool him.” Like rats they scurried away.
When Limantour came to he found a very solicitous young man concerned
with his welfare.

“I saw them from down the street,” I told him, “they evidently knocked
you out, but they cleared out when I came. Did they get anything from
you? Here seem to be some letters.” And from the sidewalk I picked up and
restored to him the papers I had taken from his pockets, not two minutes
before.

Limantour accepted them and I knew that my audacity had triumphed.

“They are not of very much importance,” said Limantour, “and I had only a
few francs on me.”

Then suddenly, as if he just realized that he was alive and unharmed,
Jose Limantour began to thank me for my assistance. I thought of those
who had told me he was a cold, hard distant man. Limantour flung
his arms around my neck. I was his savior! I was a very brave young
gentleman. If I had not come up so boldly and promptly to his aid, he
might have been very badly beaten, perhaps even killed. For all he knew
he owed me his life. He must thank me. He must know his preserver. Here
was his card. Might he have mine? I had been wise enough to keep some of
my old cards when I changed the rest of my personality from the Grand
Hotel to Montmartre. I gave him one of them.

“A German,” he exclaimed, “and a worthy representative of that worthy
race.” Limantour was enchanted. “And you live at the Grand Hotel?”

That was better still. I was only a sojourner in Paris and one might
venture to offer me hospitality—no? Next day he would send around a
formal invitation to come and dine at his house and meet his family. They
would be delighted to meet this brave and intrepid hero and would also
wish to thank me.

In a nearby café we had a drink and parted for the night. Next morning of
course I had to appear again at the Grand Hotel. On foot I walked away
from _Le Lapin Agile_, jumping into a taxi when I was out of sight. The
taxi took me to the _Gare du Nord_; there I doubled in my tracks and
presently, as if just having left a train, I took another taxi and was
driven with my luggage to the hotel. I dropped around that afternoon to
the Quai d’Orsay and called upon some of my acquaintances, remarking that
I had come back for a little holiday. That night I had the pleasure of
dining with Limantour.

Thereafter I had to lead a double life. By day, I was an habitue of
prominent hotels, restaurants, and clubs. I associated with young
diplomats and occasionally took a pretty girl to tea. By night I lived
in _Le Lapin Agile_ and consorted with thugs and their ilk. It cost me
sleep, but I did not begrudge that in view of the stakes. All this time I
was cultivating the acquaintance of Limantour and those around him.

Shortly afterward I succeeded in taking one of the members of his
household on a rather wild party and when his head was full of champagne
he babbled that Limantour and his family were planning to sail for Cuba
and Mexico on the following Saturday. I was also informed that on Friday,
the day before the sailing, there would be a farewell reception at one
of the embassies. Knowing Limantour’s habits of work as I did by this
time, I was able to lay my plans with as much certainty as prevails in
my profession. After weighing all the possibilities I decided to defer
my attempt on him until this last Friday night. I reasoned that he would
probably receive a draft of the agreement from his secretary at the club
late than night. He would take it home with him and go over it with
microscopic care. The next forenoon—Saturday—he would meet the Japanese
envoy just long enough to finish the matter and then he would hurry to
the steamer. Of course Limantour might have acted in a different way.
That was the chance one has to take.

Friday night came. In his luxurious limousine, Limantour and his family
went to the farewell reception of the embassy. Comparatively early, he
said his farewell—leaving Madame to go home later—and in his car he
proceeded to the club. I saw him pass through the vestibule after leaving
his chauffeur with instructions to wait. My guess as to Limantour’s
movements had been right, so the plans I had made worked smoothly.

I, too, had an automobile waiting near his club. Two of my men sauntered
over to Limantour’s car. Under pretence of sociability they invited his
chauffeur to have a drink. They led him into a little café on a side
street near by, the proprietor of which was in with the gang. Limantour’s
chauffeur had one drink and went to sleep. My men stripped him of his
livery, which one of them donned. Presently Limantour had a new chauffeur
sitting at the wheel of his limousine.

An hour later Limantour was seen hurrying out of the club. As a man will,
he scarcely noticed his chauffeur but cast a brief “home” to the man at
the wheel. His limousine started, following a route through deserted
residential streets, in one of which I had the trap ready. Half blocking
the road was a large automobile, apparently broken down. It was the
automobile in which I had been waiting outside the club. In it were four
of my Apaches. Limantour’s car was called upon to stop.

“Can you lend me a wrench?” one of my men shouted to Limantour’s false
chauffeur.

His limousine stopped. That free masonry which existed in the early
days between motorists lent itself nicely to the situation. It was
most natural for the chauffeur of Limantour’s car to get out and help
my stalled motor. Indeed, Limantour himself opened the door of the
limousine and half protruding his body, called out with the kindest
intentions.

To throw a chloroform-soaked towel over his head was the work of an
instant. In half a minute he was having dreams—which I trust were
pleasant. It was still necessary to keep my own men in the dark, to
give these thugs no inkling that this was a diplomatic job. This time
I was prepared; for I had learned of Limantour’s habits in regard to
carrying money on his person. In my right hand overcoat pocket there were
gold coins and bank notes. With the leader of the gang, I went through
Limantour’s clothes. In the darkness of that street, it was a simple
matter to seem to extract from them a double fist-full of gold pieces and
currency, which I turned over to _The Salmon_.

“Perhaps he has more bank notes,” I muttered, and I reached for the
inner pocket of his coat. There my fingers closed upon a stiff document
that made them tingle. “I’ll just grab everything and we can go over it
afterwards.” Out of Limantour’s possession into mine came pocket-book,
letters, card-case and that heavy familiar feeling paper.

Dumping the unconscious Limantour into his limousine we cranked up our
car and were off, leaving behind us at the worst, plain evidence of a
crime common enough in Paris. It was to be corroborated next morning by
the discovery of a drunken chauffeur, for we took pains to go back and
get him once more into his uniform and full of absinthe. But it did not
come to even that much scandal. Limantour, for obvious reasons, did not
report the incident to the police. The next morning it was given out
that Limantour had gone into the country and would not sail for a week.
He had had a sudden recrudescence of an old throat trouble and must rest
and undergo treatment before undertaking the voyage to Mexico—so the
specialist said. This report appeared in Paris newspapers of the day. Of
the protocol nothing was said at that time or later—by Señor Limantour.

I turned it over to the proper authorities in Berlin, and very soon
departed from Montmartre, leaving behind me a well-contented group of
Apaches, who assured me warmly that I was born for their profession. I
did not argue the question with them.

There the matter might have ended; but Germany had another card to play.
On February 27, 1911, Limantour left Paris for New York, to confer
with members of the Madero family, in order if possible to effect a
reconciliation and to end the Madero revolt. He landed in New York on
March 7th. On that very day, by an odd coincidence, as one commentator[2]
calls it, the United States mobilized 20,000 troops on the Mexican border!

It was no coincidence. The Wilhelmstrasse had read the proposed terms of
the treaty with great interest. It had noted the secret clauses which
gave Japan the lease of a coaling station, together with manoeuver
privileges in Magdalena Bay, or at some other port on the Mexican coast
which the Japanese Government might prefer. It had noted, too, that
agreement which, although not expressly stipulating that Japan and Mexico
should form an offensive and defensive alliance, implied that Japan would
see to it that Mexico was protected against aggression.

And then Germany—acting always for her own interests—forwarded the treaty
to Mexico, where it was placed in the hands of the American Ambassador,
Henry Lane Wilson.

Mr. Wilson immediately left for Washington with a photograph of portions
of the treaty. A Cabinet meeting was held. That night orders were sent
out for the mobilization of American troops, the assembling of United
States marines in Guantanamo and the patrolling of the west coast of
Mexico by warships of the United States.

Within a week Mr. Wilson held a conference in New York with Señor
Limantour. Limantour left hurriedly for Mexico City, arriving there March
20th. Conferences were held. Japan denied the existence of the treaty
and Washington recalled its war vessels and demobilized its troops.
But barely seven weeks after Limantour arrived in Mexico, Madero, the
bankrupt, with his handful of troops “captured” Ciudad Juarez. And
shortly after, Diaz, discredited and powerless, resigned from the office
he had held for a generation.

That is the story of the fall of Diaz so far as Germany was concerned
in it. There were other elements involved, of course—but this is not a
history of Mexico.

Germany had done the United States a service. It is interesting to
consider the motives for her action.

Those motives may be explained in two words: South America.

Germany, let it be understood, wants South America and has wanted it for
many years. Not as a possession—the Wilhelmstrasse is not insane—but as
a customer and an ally. Like many other nations, Germany has seen in the
countries of Latin America an invaluable market for her own goods and an
unequaled producer of raw supplies for her own manufacturers. She has
sought to control that market to the best of her abilities. But she has
also done what no other European nation has dared to do—she has attempted
to form alliances with the South American countries which, in the event
of war between the United States and Germany, would create a diversion in
Germany’s favor, and effectively tie the hands of the United States so
far as any offensive action was concerned.

There was just one stumbling block to this plan: the Monroe Doctrine.
It was patent to German diplomats that such an alliance could never
be secured unless the South American countries were roused to such a
degree of hostility against the United States that they would welcome an
opportunity to affront the government which had proclaimed that doctrine.
And Germany, casting about for a means of making trouble, had encouraged
the Japanese-Mexican alliance, hoping for intervention in Mexico and the
subsequent arousal of fear and ill-feeling toward the United States on
the part of the South American countries.

_And Germany had been so anxious for the United States to intervene in
Mexico that she had not only encouraged a treaty which would be inimical
to your interests, but had made certain that knowledge of this treaty
should come into your government’s hands by placing it there herself!_

The United States did not intervene and Germany for the moment failed.
But Germany did not give up hope. The intrigue against the United States
through Mexico had only begun.

It has not ended yet.




CHAPTER VI.

    _My letter again. I go to America and become a United States
    soldier. Sent to Mexico and sentenced to death there. I join
    Villa’s army and gain an undeserved reputation._


I must leave Europe behind me now and go on to the period embraced in
the last five years. A private soldier in your United States Army—the
victim of an attempt at assassination in stormy Mexico—major in the
Mexican army; once again German secret agent and aide of Franz von Papen,
the German Military Attaché in Washington; prisoner under suspicion of
espionage, in a British prison, and finally your Government’s central
witness in the summer of 1916, in a case that was the sensation of its
hour—these are the roles I have been called on to play in that brief
space of time.

In the month of April, 1912, I abruptly quitted the service of my
government. The reasons which impelled me were very serious. You
remember that my active life began with the discovery of a document of
such personal and political significance that government agents followed
me all over Europe until I drove a bargain with them for it. In the
winter of 1912, by a chain of circumstances I must keep to myself, that
self-same document came again into my possession. I knew enough then, and
was ambitious enough, to determine that this time I would utilize to the
full the power which possession of it gave me. But it could not be used
in Germany. Therefore I disappeared.

There was an immediate search for me, which was most active in Russia. I
was not in Russia nor in Europe. After running over in mind all the most
unlikely places I could put myself I had found one that seemed ideal.

While they were scouring Russia for me I was making my way across
the Atlantic Ocean in the capacity of steward in the steerage of the
steamship _Kroonland_ of the Red Star Line.

[Illustration: The telegram von der Goltz received from Villa, inviting
him to go to Mexico with Dr. Rachbaum, Villa’s physician, and join the
Constitutionalist army.]

The _Kroonland_ docked in New York City in May, 1912. I left her
as abruptly as I had left a prouder service. Three days later a
sorry-looking vagabond, I had applied for enlistment in the United States
Army and had been accepted. I was sent to the recruiting camp at Fort
Slocum, and under the severe eye of a sergeant began to learn my drill.

It was toward the middle of May that I—or rather, “Frank
Wachendorf”—enlisted. After a stretch of recruit training at Fort Slocum,
I was assigned to the Nineteenth Infantry, then at Fort Leavenworth,
Kansas.

I learned my drill—shades of Gross Lichterfelde!—with extreme ease. That
is the only single thing that I was officially asked to do.

But early in my short and pleasant career as a United States soldier
something happened which gave me special occupation. My small library
was discovered. Among the volumes were Mahan’s “Sea Power” and Gibbon’s
“Decline and Fall”—not just the books one would look for among the
possessions of a country lout hardly able to stammer twenty words in
English. But the mishap turned in my favor. My captain sent for me.

“Wachendorf,” he said, “you probably have your own reasons for being
where you are. That is none of my business. But you don’t have to stay
there. If you want to go in for a commission you are welcome to my books
and to any aid I can give you.”

Thereafter life in the Nineteenth was decidedly agreeable. I set myself
sincerely and whole-heartedly at the task of winning a commission in your
army. I believe I might eventually have won it, too. But fate revealed
other plans for me when I had been an American soldier some nine months.

That winter of 1913, you remember, had been a stormy period in Mexico.
Huerta had made his coup d’etat. Francisco Madero had been deposed and
murdered. President Taft had again mobilized part of the United States
forces on the border, leaving his successor, President Wilson, to deal
with a Southern neighbor in the throes of revolution.

The Nineteenth Infantry was ordered to Galveston, Texas. And in Galveston
the agents of Berlin suddenly put their fingers on me again. It happened
in the public library. I was reading a book there one day when a man I
knew well came and sat down beside me. We will call him La Vallee—born
and bred a Frenchman, but one of Germany’s most trusted agents.

“_Wie gehts, von der Goltz?_” was his greeting.

I told him he had mistaken me for some one else. He laughed.

“What’s the use of bluffing,” he asked, “when each of us knows the other?
Just read these instructions I’m carrying.” He laid a paper before me.

La Vallee’s instructions were brief and outwardly not threatening. Find
von der Goltz, they bade him. Try to make him realize how great a wrong
he was guilty of when he deserted his country. But let him understand,
too, that his government appreciates his services and believes he acted
impulsively. If he will prove his loyalty by returning to his duty his
mistake will be blotted out.

I read carefully and asked La Vallee how I was expected to prove my
loyalty at that particular time.

“You know what it is like in Mexico now,” he said. “Our government has
heavy interests there. Your services are needed in helping to look out
for them.”

“But,” I objected, “I am a soldier in the United States Army. You are
asking me to be a deserter.”

“Germany,” said La Vallee, “has the first claim on every German. If
your duty happens to make you seem a deserter, that is all right. Frank
Wachendorf must manage to bear the disgrace. Speaking of that,” he added,
carelessly enough, but eyeing me severely, “were you not indiscreet
there? Suppose some enemy should find out that you made false statements
when you enlisted? I believe there is a penalty.”

La Vallee knew that he had me in his power. I had to yield, and was told
to report to the German Consul at Juarez, across the Rio Grande from
El Paso. So in March, 1913, Frank Robert Wachendorf, private, became a
deserter from the United States Army and a reward of $50 was offered for
his arrest.

Before I crossed the border I had one very important piece of business
to attend to, and I stopped in El Paso long enough to finish it.
Mexico, under the conditions that prevailed, was an ideal trap for me.
As the lesser of two evils I had decided to risk my body there. But I
had no mind to risk also what was to Berlin of far more value than my
body—namely, that document which, a year before, had led to my abrupt
departure from Germany and her service.

In El Paso, where I was utterly unacquainted, I had to find some friend
in whose stanchness I could put the ultimate trust. Being a Roman
Catholic, I made friends with a priest and led him into gossip about
different members of his flock. He spoke of a harnessmaker and saddler,
one E. Koglmeier, an unmarried man of about fifty, who kept a shop in
South Santa Fe Street. He was, the priest said, the most simple-minded,
simple-hearted and utterly faithful man he knew.

I lost no time in making Koglmeier’s acquaintance, on the priest’s
introduction, and we soon were on friendly terms. When I crossed the
international bridge I left behind in his safe a sealed package of
papers. He knew only that he was to speak to no one about them and was to
deliver them only to me in person or to a man who bore my written order
for them.

I reported to the German Consul in Juarez. He asked me to carry on to
Chihuahua certain reports and letters addressed to Kueck, the German
Consul there. From Chihuahua Kueck sent me on to Parral with other
documents. And a German official in Parral gave me another parcel of
papers to carry back to Kueck.

I had no sooner reached Chihuahua on the return trip than I was put
under arrest by an officer of the Federal (Huertista) forces, then in
control of the city. I asked on whose authority. On that, he said, of
Gen. Salvador Mercado. I was a spy engaged in disseminating anti-Federal
propaganda. I had to laugh at the sheer absurdity of that, and asked what
proofs he had to sustain such charges.

“The papers you are carrying,” he said then, “will be proof enough, I
think.”

Chihuahua was under martial law. I had not the slightest inkling as to
what might be in those papers I had so obligingly transported. I had put
my foot into it, as your saying goes, up to my neck, the place where a
noose fits.

They marched me up to the cuartel and into the presence of Gen. Mercado.
That was June 23, 1913, at 9 o’clock in the evening.

Gen. Salvador Mercado, then the supreme authority in Chihuahua, with
practical powers of life and death over its people, proved to be a squat,
thick, bull-necked man with a face of an Indian and the bearing of a
bully.

His first words stirred my temper to the bottom, luckily for me. If I had
confronted the man with any other emotion than raging anger I should not
be alive now.

“Your Consul will do no good,” he told me sneeringly. “He says you are
not a German. You are a Gringo. You are a bandit and a robber. You have
turned spy against us, too, I am going to make short work of you. But
first you are going to tell me all you know.”

As the completeness of the frame-up flashed upon me I went wild. There
was a chair beside me. I converted one leg into a club and started for
Mercado. The five other men in the room got the best holds upon me that
they could. By the time they had mastered me Mercado had backed away into
the furthest corner of the room.

The remainder of our interview was stormy and fruitless. It resulted in
my being taken to Chihuahua penitentiary, the strongest prison in Mexico,
and thrown into a cell. It was two months and a half before I came out
again.

There is small use going in detail into the major and minor degradations
of life in a Mexican prison. I pass over _cimex lectularius_ and the
warfare which ended with my release. There are more edifying things to
tell. For instance, how I came into possession of half a blanket and a
pair of friends.

I was confined—incommunicado, a sentry with fixed bayonet standing before
my door—in an upper tier in the officers’ wing. Confinement in the
officers’ wing carried one special privilege in which I, the desperado,
did not share. During the day the cell doors were left open and the
prisoners had the run of the corridor and galleries. My sentry’s bayonet
barred them from me, but could not keep them from talking of the new
prisoner who claimed to be a German and was suffering because he was
suspected of attachment to the Constitutionalist cause.

On my third or fourth night there I was attracted to my cell door by a
sibilant “_Oiga! Aleman!_” and something soft was thrust between the bars.

“German,” whispered a voice in Spanish out of the blackness, “it is cold
to-night. We have brought you up a blanket.”

So began my friendship with Pablo Almendaris and Rafael Castro, two young
Constitutionalist officers. Almendaris, in particular, later became a
chum of mine. He was a long, lank, solemn individual, the very image of
Don Quixote of La Mancha. I remember him with love because he was the man
who gave to me in prison, out of kindness of heart, a full half of his
single blanket.

This is how it happened. He and Rafael Castro, who were cellmates, had
contrived a way to pick their lock and roam the cell block at night,
stark naked, their brown skins blending perfectly with the dingy walls.
They had already heard the story of my plight. That night Almendaris
had cut his blanket in two, and the pair, with the bit of wool and a
bottle of tequila they had bought that day when the prison market was
open, sneaked up to the gallery and my cell. They gave the liquor to the
sentry, who, being an Indian, promptly drank the whole of it down and
became blissfully unconscious.

The blanket was the first of many gifts, and many were the chats we had
together, all with a practical purpose.

“If you ever escape or are released,” Almendaris kept telling me, “go to
Trinidad Rodriguez. He is my colonel. And if you ever get out of Mexico,
go to El Paso and hunt up Labansat. He is there.”

So they contrived to alleviate the minor evils of my predicament, and I
shall never forget them. The major difficulty was beyond their reach. The
trap had closed completely round me. The charge of spying and Mercado’s
general truculence were only cloaks for a more subtle hostility from
another quarter. The reason for my imprisonment was soon revealed openly.

I had made various attempts to communicate with Kueck, the German Consul.
Always I met the retort that Kueck himself said I was no German. At the
same time, managing to smuggle an appeal for aid to the American Consul,
I was informed that etiquette forbade his taking any steps in my behalf.
Kueck himself, he said, had told him the German Consulate was doing
all it could to protect me. It did not need a Bismarck to grasp the
implications of those contradictory statements.

After I had been in prison for about three weeks Kueck came to see me and
made the whole matter thoroughly plain.

“Von der Goltz,” he opened bluntly, “you are in a bad situation.”

“Do you think so?” I asked him, significantly.

“I have every reason to think so,” he said. “My hands are tied. I
positively can take no steps in your behalf, unless”—he looked straight
at me—“unless you restore certain documents you have no right to possess.”

They had me nicely. The surrender of my letter was the price I must pay
for my life. Acting under instructions, he had made me a definite offer.
I had to take it or leave it.

I could not give the letter up. It was my guarantee of safety. As long as
Kueck did not know where it was I was valuable to him only while alive.
Furthermore, I had some hopes of being freed by outside aid. Through
Almendaris I had learned that the Constitutionalists were attacking
Chihuahua, with good hope of taking the city. I knew that if they
succeeded, the German—whose suffering for their cause, I was told, was
known throughout their forces—would be well taken care of. So I reached
my decision.

“Herr Consul,” I said, “I will not give up the papers you refer to. I am
not a child. Those papers are in a safe place. So are instructions as
to their disposal in case of emergency. Let anything happen to me, and
within a fortnight every newspaper in the United States will be printing
the most sensational story within memory.”

On July 23, 1913, I was tried by court-martial and sentenced to death.
That led to a bitter personal quarrel between Gen. Manuel Chao, the
Constitutionalist commander attacking the city, and Mercado, who defended
it.

Chao sent in a flag of truce, absolving me from any connection with his
cause and threatening that if I were killed Mercado personally would have
to pay the score when the Constitutionalists took Chihuahua. The Indian
bully retorted that if the Constitutionalists ever captured the city they
would not find their pet alive there.

Three times in the weeks that followed, the Constitutionalist forces
seemed on the point of capturing Chihuahua. Have you ever walked out
with your own firing squad and spent an endless half hour on a chilly
morning in the company of an officer with drawn sword, five soldiers with
loaded rifles and a sergeant with the revolver destined to give you your
_coup de grace_? Three times that happened to me, at Mercado’s orders. My
profession has seldom permitted me to indulge in personal hatreds, but as
I was marched back from that third bad half hour my mind was filled with
one thought: If ever I got Mercado where he had me then I would let him
know what it felt like.

Then matters came to a crisis. Reinforcements were brought up from Mexico
City and the Constitutionalist besiegers suffered a crushing defeat. I
could put no more hope in them.

Kueck came again to see me.

“Give me an order on Koglmeier for those papers,” he demanded. “There’s
no use saying Koglmeier hasn’t got them, for I know he has.”

I could see he was not bluffing, and knew the game was up. I signed the
release for the papers. There had been no personal animosity between
Kueck and myself. I had seen too much of life to be angry with a man
simply because he was obeying his orders.

[Illustration: Constitutionalist soldiers surrounding the first cannon
captured by Villa after he was released from prison in Mexico City.]

About September 12, 1913, Kueck came to escort me out of prison, and in
his own carriage drove me to the railway station, bound north, out of
Mexico. I had a sheaf of letters, signed by Kueck, which recommended
me, as Baron von der Goltz, to the good offices of German Consular
representatives throughout the United States and requested them to supply
me with funds.

The last man who spoke to me in Chihuahua was Col. Carlos Orozco,
commander of the Sixth Battalion of Infantry, and Gen. Mercado’s
right-hand man, though his bitter enemy. His farewell was a threat. “You
are lucky to get out of Mexico,” he told me. “If you ever come back and I
see you I will have you shot at once.” My next meeting with Col. Carlos
Orozco occurred on Mexican soil.

Escorted by Consul Kueck out of Mexico I went up to El Paso, determined
to return to Mexico as soon as possible. But before I did anything else,
I felt a very great desire to square accounts with Gen. Salvador Mercado.

So I stopped off at El Paso to look for Labansat, the Constitutionalist
about whom my friend Pablo Almendaris told me while I was in prison, I
lost no time in getting into touch with him and other members of the
Constitutionalist junta.

Another acquaintance made at that time proved very useful to me later.
Dr. L. A. Raschbaum, Francisco Villa’s personal physician, was a fellow
guest at the Ollendorf Hotel.

We were an earnest but impecunious bunch. Juan T. Burns, now Mexican
Consul General in New York, may still remember a morning when he and I
found ourselves with one nickel between us and the necessity of getting
breakfast for two at an El Paso lunch counter. That lone “jitney” bought
a cup of coffee and two rolls. Each of us took a roll and we drank the
cup of coffee mutually.

I also renewed my intimacy with Koglmeier, the saddler in South Santa Fe
Street. He told me a man he did not know had come with my written order
for the papers I had left in his safe and he had turned them over.

Despairing at last of obtaining results at El Paso, I availed myself of
my consular recommendations and went out to Los Angeles, Cal. There I
received help from Geraldine Farrar, whom I had known in Germany, and in
November, 1913, directly after the battle of Tierra Blancha, Chihuahua, I
received a telegram saying: “Dr. Raschbaum’s proposition accepted; come
at once,” and signed “Francisco Villa.” My way lay open before me and I
was free to start.

I reached El Paso on November 27th and went on to Chihuahua, which had
fallen into the hands of the Constitutionalists. Once there, I looked
up my friend of the half blanket, Pablo Almendaris, and by him was
introduced to Col. Trinidad Rodriguez, commanding a cavalry brigade, who
promptly attached me to his staff, with the rank of captain.

The Federalists had retreated across the desert northward and settled
themselves in Ojinaga, the so-called Gibraltar of the Rio Grande, a
tremendously strong natural position.

Toward the middle of December we received orders to proceed to the
attack of Ojinaga. Our brigade and the troops of Gens. Panfilo Natira
and Toribio Ortega were included in the expedition, some 7,000 men. The
railway carried us seventy miles. The rest of the journey had to be
made on horseback. During four days of marching in the desert I made
acquaintance with Mexican mounted infantry, the most effective arm for
such conditions and country the world has seen.

Arriving before the outer defenses of Ojinaga, we began our siege of the
city. Soon after I got my first sight of Pancho Villa.

Of a sudden one evening, Trinidad Rodriguez told me that “Pancho” had
just arrived and we must ride over for a conference with him.

We found Villa lying on a saddle blanket in an irrigation ditch in the
company of Raul Madero, brother of the murdered President, a handful of
officers who had come up with them, and our own commanders, Natira and
Ortega.

Madero, to my mind one of the ablest Mexicans alive, was clad in the
dingiest of old gray sweaters. Villa, unkempt, unshaven and unshorn, was
begrimed and weary from his ride across the desert. But he seemed full of
bottled-up energy, and when Gen. Rodriguez and I came up he was giving
Gen. Ortega a talking to because so little had been accomplished in
regard to taking Ojinaga.

While we talked I rolled me a cigarette, and all at once he broke
off abruptly. “Give me some of that, too,” he demanded. I handed him
“the makings” and he attempted a cigarette. He was so clumsy with it
that I had to roll it for him. Then for the first and last time in my
acquaintance with him I saw Pancho Villa smoke. Contrary to the stories
that have gone out about him, he is a most abstemious man with regard to
alcohol and tobacco.

On Christmas night, 1913, happened the adventure which made me, quite by
accident, and without intention, a hero. Also, I underwent the greatest
fright of my life.

My commander, Rodriguez, had received orders to make an attack that night
straight-forward toward Ojinaga. After it was completely dark we formed
and advanced, finding ourselves very soon among the willows lining the
bank of the Rio Conchas, which we had to cross.

It was my first taste of genuine warfare, and I cannot begin to tell you
how it affected me, how ghastly it was among the willows in the vague
darkness through which the column was threading its way with the utmost
possible quietness. The beat of hoofs was muffled in the soggy ground,
and the only sound to break the utter stillness of the night was the
occasional clank of a spur or thin neigh of a horse.

Then all at once, to the front and in the distance, came a boom—the
single growling of a field-gun. Ping! Ping! Ping! broke out a volley of
rifle shots, and then with its r-r-r-r-r! a Hotchkiss machine gun got
to work. A staccato bam! bam! bam! as a Colt’s machine gun joined the
chorus. Somewhere troops were going into serious action. That was no
skirmishing.

We finally crossed the river and dismounted. Part of the brigade had gone
astray. Rodriguez cursed impatiently and incessantly under his breath
until it joined us. He was a born cavalry leader, mad for action. Any
sort of waiting lacerated his nerves.

In line, with rifles trailing, we moved across the unknown terrain of
low, rolling hills. On our front there had been no firing. Then all at
once, directly before us and not far ahead, sounded a startled “_Qui
vive?_” and an instant’s silence while the surprised outpost of the enemy
waited for an answer. “_Alerta! Alerta!_” sounded his shrill alarm.

Hell broke open around us then. Rifles, machine guns and cannon opened
fire all at once. Bullets whined above our heads and bursting shrapnel
fell around us. We had just come to an irrigation ditch, six feet wide,
with a high wire fence on the further bank of it.

“Stay here till they’re all across and look for skulkers,” Trinidad
Rodriguez gave himself time to order me, then leaped across the ditch and
began to run toward the fence. “Come on here, boys!” he shouted.

The men were quickly across. I followed, or tried to, and just as my
front foot touched the further bank the clay crumbled. Down I went into
the ditch.

When I recovered myself in that four feet of mud and water and poked my
head up over the bank the fence had been demolished. Beyond it countless
rifles spat tongues of fire toward me. But not a living soul was near.
The night had swallowed up every last one of our men.

Fright had not come yet. I was bewildered. I still had my rifle and began
to use it. After a few discharges there came a violent wrench and the
barrel parted company with the rest of the weapon. It had been shot to
pieces in my hands. I threw the stock away and got out my revolver—a Colt
.44 single-action, of the frontier model.

Boom! There was a roar like a field-gun’s and a flash that lit up the
night all round me. The wet weapon was outdoing itself in pyrotechnics,
and I was unnecessarily attracting attention to myself. So, half
swimming, half wading, I moved down the ditch in the direction of the
high hill which, looming vaguely, seemed half familiar to me.

I was lost, you understand. I had come at night into unknown terrain.
I welcomed that hill, which seemed to give me back my bearings. I
reached the base of it, got out of my ditch and began to climb, with some
caution, luckily for me. For just as I stole over the crest a roar and a
flash obliterated the night. Two enemy field-pieces had been discharged
together, almost into my face.

Deeming it more than likely that the flash had shown the gunners one
startled Teutonic face, I rolled down that hill and was once more in my
ditch. But panic had full possession of me. I climbed out on the far side
and ran among the scattered trees there until I realized that no racer
can hope to outrun a bullet. Then I stopped.

Phut! Phut! Bullets were hissing into the soft irrigated ground all round
me, for by accident I had gotten into a very dangerous zone of dropping
cross-fire, while overhead shrapnel was searching out blindly for our
horses.

By good luck I knew the trumpet calls. Whenever the signal to fire
sounded I took what cover I could, going on again in what I decided was
the direction of the Rio Conchas as soon as the bugles called “cease
firing.”

After a while I found a small gray horse standing dejectedly by a tree.
I mounted him and eventually got among the willows on the river bank.
There the horse collapsed under me without a warning quiver or groan, and
when I had wriggled myself loose and groped him over I discovered the
poor brute must have been shot as full of holes as a flute before I ever
found him.

But I had small sympathy to spend on fallen horses just then. Cleaning my
gory hands as best I could on breeches and tunic, I stumbled on through
the bushes. After a long time I came, by accident, to the place where the
brigade had dismounted to go into action. The mounts were mostly gone,
but a few still stood there, with perhaps a score of men and one officer,
Lieut. Col. Patricio, who was vastly surprised at my sudden appearance
from the direction of the front.

Our brigade had been withdrawn within twenty minutes of the beginning
of the action—as soon as it was quite certain the surprise had failed.
Patricio was waiting there because his brother had been killed and he
wanted, if possible, to take back his body.

“But,” cried the colonel, suddenly warming into emotion, “you—where have
you been? You, valiant German, refused to come back with the others! All
night, all by yourself, you have been fighting single-handed. Let me
embrace you!”

He flung his arms about me, to receive a fresh surprise. “You are all
sticky with something,” he cried. “What is it?”

“Blood,” I told him simply and truthfully. My reputation was made.

Bravado stirs a Mexican as nothing else can. Counterfeit bravado is just
as effective as any so long as the substitution is not suspected. Young
Capt. von der Goltz, in his first real engagement, had got stupidly lost
and very badly frightened. But of Capt. von der Goltz Col. Patricio and
his troopers sang the praises for days thereafter to every officer and
every peon soldier they met. He had fought on alone for hours after every
comrade left him. He had bathed himself in the blood of his enemies, up
to his hips and up to his shoulders. You could see it on his clothes.

By the time Ojinaga fell “_El Diable Aleman_”—the German Devil—had become
a tradition of the Constitutionalist Army.

Ojinaga fell at New Year’s, 1914, the Federalists retreating across the
Rio Grande into the United States. We pursued them. And on the bank of
the river I had a little adventure.

You remember that when I left Chihuahua, a released prisoner, the last
person who spoke to me was Col. Carlos Orozco, commanding the Sixth
Infantry Battalion, and his farewell was a threat.

That Sixth Battalion had been engaged in the defense of Ojinaga and
had retreated with its fellow organizations. When I came up to the Rio
Grande a small body of fugitives was in midstream. My handful of troopers
rode in, surrounded them and brought them back to Mexico. Their heroic
commander, who had offered no show of resistance, proved to be Orozco,
with the colors of his outfit wrapped round his body, under his blouse!

The provocation was too much for me. “Don Carlos,” I asked him, “is it
possible you have forgotten me? When we parted last time you promised
to shoot me if ever we met again. I am naturally all on fire to learn
whether you are thinking of keeping your promise now?”

Prominent prisoners were getting short shrift in those days, and Orozco
preserved a sullen silence. But I let him ford the river to safety. He
eventually got back to Mexico City and Huerta, by way of San Antonio,
Galveston and Vera Cruz. The story of his exploit at Ojinaga, the sole
Federal officer to come out of it alive, unwounded, and bringing his
colors with him, furnished columns of copy to _El Imparcial_ and the
other papers. Friends and admirers of his who heard the lion roar at that
time may find some interest in this less romantic record of his adventure.

I had another account to settle with my old acquaintance, Consul Kueck
of Chihuahua. During the last battle before Ojinaga an officer struck up
a rifle which he saw a peon aiming at my back. The ball whistled over my
head. The soldier later saw fit to confess the reason for his act. He
said that a big, fat German—Kueck’s secretary, he thought—had come to him
just before we left Chihuahua on our expedition and had given him 500
pesos to attempt my life.

Returning to Chihuahua very soon after New Year’s, I made it my business
to call on Consul Kueck. He had cleared out across the border to El Paso,
just before we got in.

Failing the principal, I took the liberty of arresting Kueck’s secretary
inside the sacred precincts of the Foreign Club. After my adjutant and he
and I had three or four hours’ private talk and he understood how likely
he was to occupy the cell in Chihuahua penitentiary which had once been
mine, he helped me obtain copies of certain documents in the consular
archives, particularly the letter Kueck had written the American Consul
affirming himself to be fully responsible for my safety, at the very time
when he was setting Mercado on and telling me that he could and would do
nothing for me. Once I got hold of that, I felt fairly certain that Kueck
would be moderate in his dealings with me thereafter.

Only Gen. Salvador Mercado stood wholly on the debit side of my account
book. I had heard that he had been captured on United States soil, along
with numerous other fugitive Federal officers, and had been put for
safekeeping into the detention camp at El Paso.

It chanced that Villa and Raul Madero went up to the border for a few
days of the winter race-meet at Juarez, just across the river from El
Paso. Don Raul was kind enough to invite me too, and I went along in
fettle, with a new uniform. Our army was in funds and I had all the money
I wanted.

From Juarez it was merely a matter of crossing the international bridge
to be in El Paso. I went over. I wanted to see Koglmeier, the saddler in
South Santa Fe Street, and I wanted to visit the detention camp.

I chose to see the camp first, and had the forethought to fill one of
the pockets of my overcoat with Mexican gold pieces, very welcome to my
whilom enemies. Poor fellows, they were, most of them, in the tattered
clothing they had worn when captured. Their faces were wan and meagre and
they were glad enough to accept, along with my greeting, the bits of gold
I contrived to slip into their hands.

In the center of the camp we came upon a tent more imposing than its
mates, though by no means palatial.

“This,” said my cicerone, “is the quarters of Gen. Mercado, the ranking
officer here. Do you wish to pay him your respects?”

As I have said, Salvador Mercado is squat and thick in build, with a bull
neck. Some day, I fear, he is going to die of apoplexy, if he does not
fall, more gloriously, in action. He shows certain apoplectic symptoms.
For instance, as we stepped inside his tent and he saw who one of his
visitors was, his neck swelled till it threatened to burst his collar.

“My General,” I assured him warmly, “it is indeed a pleasure and an honor
to see you again. I trust the climate up here agrees with you?” I did not
offer him a gold piece when he said good-bye.

[Illustration: Photograph of a clipping from the El Paso Herald of
December 22, 1913. No motive has ever been discovered for the crime,
other than the theory advanced by Captain von der Goltz.]

From the detention camp I went to Koglmeier’s shop in South Santa Fe
Street. Both front and rear doors were standing open, and through the
back of one I could see Koglmeier’s horse, a beast I had often ridden,
switching its tail in the yard, which was its stable. I went into the
store. “Koglmeier!” I called. “Oh, Koglmeier!”

From the side of the shop stepped out a man on whom I had never set eyes
before.

“Koglmeier ain’t here.”

“But he must be here,” I insisted. “I can see his horse out there in the
yard.”

“Yes,” said the man, “the horse is here, but Koglmeier ain’t. Nor he
won’t be. It just happens that Koglmeier’s dead.”

“When did he die?”

“The 20th of last December,” said the man. “But he didn’t die. He got
murdered.”

On the night of that 20th of December, Koglmeier, the quietest, most
inoffensive man in El Paso, had been murdered in his shop. It looked,
said my informant, “like his head had been beat in with a hatchet,
or something.” Robbery apparently had not been the motive, for his
possessions were untouched. If he had made an outcry it had not attracted
attention, perhaps because a carousel was going full blast in the vacant
lot beside his place of business. The authorities were utterly at sea,
and still are. The United States Department of Justice agents told me
they could find no motive for the murder. I knew the motive. Koglmeier
had kept “my documents” for me; therefore Imperial Germany had willed he
die.

[Illustration: This “six months’ leave of absence” granted by Gen.
Raul Madero of the Mexican Constitutionalist army to von der Goltz, is
declared by von der Goltz to have saved him from the death of a spy, when
the British captured him in London. With this document von der Goltz was
enabled to convince the London War Office that instead of being a German
spy he was a bona-fide Mexican army officer on leave of absence. At the
right is the letter of recommendation given von der Goltz by Madero at
the same time.]

Koglmeier was the only German in El Paso who was a friend of mine, and
knew of the existence of those documents which I had been forced to give
up through the agency of Mercado’s firing squads.

His end subdued the festive spirit in me and I was not sorry when we
started back for the interior of Mexico.

Torreon was taken by Villa on April 2, 1914, and we settled down there
for a brief period of rest and recuperation. Rest! Torreon stands out in
my memory as the scene of the most hectic activity I have indulged in.
Raul Madero and I have since laughed over the ludicrousness of it. But at
the time it was deadly serious. My reputation was at stake. I managed to
save it barely by the skin of its teeth.

Chief Trinidad Rodriguez got twenty machine guns down from the United
States and turned them over to me. “Train your gun crews and get the
platoons ready for field service,” he ordered. “You can have three weeks.
Then I shall need them.”

Without a word I saluted and turned on my heel. I could not very well
tell my general that I had never in my life touched even the tip of one
finger to a machine gun.

The guns arrived next day, as promised. They had been sent to us bare,
just the barrels and tripods. There were no holsters, no pack saddles
for either guns or ammunition, not one of the accessories which equip
a machine gun company for action. I had to start from the ground, in
literal truth. And I had not a soul to advise me how to begin.

We loaded the guns onto our wagons, took them over to camp and laid them
side by side in a long row down the center of an empty ware-house in
Torreon.

That satisfied me for one afternoon. I went over to Gen. Rodriguez’s
quarters.

“I’ve got the guns,” I reported.

“Good!” he cried. “I shall want the platoons ready for action in three
weeks. Not a day later.”

It was up to me to have them ready. So I got busy at once.

My first move was an abduction. There happened to be in Torreon jail
at that time a first class bank robber named Jefferson, who was being
held for the arrival of extradition papers from Texas. The day after my
guns arrived Jefferson escaped, and though the authorities made diligent
search they failed to find him. He knew more about machine guns than I
did. His profession had made him an excellent mechanic. Furthermore,
he had Yankee ingenuity and American “git up and git.” We soon had all
twenty guns set up in working order.

Then came the problem of the gun crews. Our Indians, slow, thick-headed,
stubborn and stolid, were no fit material for such highly specialized
work. Machine gun manipulation requires special qualifications in every
man concerned. Three men compose the crew. One squats behind the shield
and pulls the trigger. The second, prone, slides the clips of cartridges
into the breach. The third passes up the supply of ammunition. At any
moment the gun may heat and jam. Also, at any moment any one of the trio
may fall, yet his work must be carried on. I have seen a gunner sit on
the dying body of a comrade and coolly aim and fire, the action being so
hot there was not time to drag the wounded man aside. You cannot take an
Indian wild from the hills and in twenty-one days fit him to do such work
as that by any course of training.

My only resort was to get my gun crews ready made.

A brigade not far away from ours possessed machine gun platoons which
were the pride of its heart. I looked at them, and broke first the Tenth
and then the Eight Commandment.

To a wise old sergeant I gave a hundred pesos.

“Juan,” I told him, “get the men of those machine gun crews drunk in this
quarter of Torreon. And encourage them to be noisy.”

Juan obeyed instructions. Once the beer and mezcal took hold, the men I
wanted became boisterous enough to justify our provost guard in running
them all in. The rest was simple. The breach of discipline was condoned
by Gen. Rodriguez only on condition that the culprits were turned over to
him for further discipline.

So I got my gun crews. I was beginning to have hopes. The best saddler in
the city was making holsters. When I first approached him with an order
he had promptly thrown up his hands. “There is not a scrap of leather
left in Torreon,” he said.

I instantly thought of chair backs. In Spanish countries furniture
upholstered in old carved Cordovan leather is an heirloom. In time of
war ruthlessness is a useful quality. I soon presented my saddler with
sufficient leather for my purpose and could turn my attention to pack
saddles. Not even the sawbuck frames were procurable in Torreon, but wood
was plenty. And there was a jail filled with idle prisoners. Ten days
after the first sight of my guns I was able to report to Gen. Rodriguez
that the platoons were coming along.

“But I have no mules for them yet,” I hinted.

He sent a hundred next day, beauties, fat, strong, in the pink of
condition. But they had come straight down from the mesa. They could be
trusted to kick saddles, guns, tripods, holsters and ammunition cases
into nothing at the least provocation.

Torreon was celebrating its new Constitutionalism with daily bull
fights. Each afternoon, while the fight was on, the plaza before the
entrance to the ring was crowded with public rigs in waiting, all drawn
by sorry-looking mules, half fed and too worn out to have a single kick
left in them.

With a squad of troopers I descended on the plaza one day. No cabbie
anywhere is markedly shy or retiring, and these were hill-bred muleteros.
But we got the mules in the end.

“You are getting the best of the bargain,” I assured them. “I am only
swapping with you. In the corral I have a hundred fine, strong, new mules
worth three times as much as these played-out beasts you are getting rid
of. You can have the nice new ones to-morrow.”

If Gen. Trinidad ever guessed how thoroughly improvised his favorite
outfit was—the second in command a bank robber on enforced vacation, the
gunners kidnapped, the equipment made by forced labor from commandeered
material, and the mules snatched rudely from between the shafts of
cabs—he made no comment.

He did not live long to enjoy the fruits of my labors. In mid-June,
during the ten-day attack which resulted in the fall of Zacatecas, he was
mortally wounded.

I shall always remember that day, not only for the death of my chief, but
for a personal bit of adventure.

I was temporarily away from my guns with some riflemen in a trench. The
enemy fire was very hot and the men became exceedingly restive. Something
had to be done to steady them, for there was no cover of any sort on the
bullet-swept, shrapnel-searched plain behind us. Retreat was impossible.
There were plenty of horrors in the situation—the blazing sun, the sense
of isolation, the cries and curses of the men who were being struck. And
there was the cactus.

Unless you have been under fire of high-power rifles in a region where
the common broad-leaved cactus grows you cannot guess its nerve-shaking
possibilities. A jacketed bullet can pierce a score of leaves without
much diminution of its velocity, and as it goes through the thick, juicy
flesh, it lets out a sound like the spitting of some gigantic cat. Ten
Mauser bullets piercing cactus can make you believe a whole battalion is
concentrating its fire on your one small but precious person.

The men were getting demoralized. If they broke I was done for. If I
stayed in the trench alone the Federals would eventually get me and stand
me up to the nearest wall. If I retreated with them, nothing was gained.
No man can hope to outrun a bullet.

I stood up, exposing my body from mid-thigh upward to that withering
fire, and took out my cigarette case. The nearest men watched side-wise,
waiting to see me fall.

By some fortune I was not hit, and after a moment looked down at the man
beside me.

“Hello, Pablo!” I said, “why aren’t you smoking, too?” I offered my case
to him, but took good care to stretch out my arm quite level. To get at
the contents he had to rise to his feet.

Habit won. He did not even hesitate, and I held my cigarette, Mexican
fashion, for him to take a light. Once committed in that fashion, he was
too proud to show the white feather, and he and I smoked our cigarettes
out while the bullets flew. It was the longest cigarette, I think, I ever
smoked, but it turned the trick. We held on to that trench till darkness
put an end to the fire.

After the capture of Zacatecas I went to the staff of Gen. Raul Madero,
with the rank of Major. The invitation had been extended several times
before. Now that Trinidad was dead, there was nothing to hold me back,
and I very gladly joined the official family of the brother of the
murdered President. Since my first association with him, before Ojinaga,
he had impressed me as the ablest man I had seen south of the Rio Grande.

The closer and constant contact entailed by my becoming a member of his
staff confirmed that feeling. Raul Madero has clarity of intelligence,
an encyclopaedic grasp of Mexican affairs, social, religious, political
and financial, and a winning personality that masks abundant energy and
determination.

I was associated with him for only six weeks. On June 28th, 1914, you
remember, the Archduke Francis Ferdinand of Austria was assassinated.
All through July the Austrian Government was formulating its demands
on Serbia, which culminated in the ultimatum of July 23. Long before
that I had formed my opinion as to which way the wind was to blow. And
I had a sufficiently conceited notion of my usefulness as a trained and
experienced agent to believe that when the general European disturbance
should break out my days as a soldier of fortune in Mexico would be ended.

Toward the end of July a stranger brought me credentials proving him a
messenger from Consul Kueck in El Paso.

“The Consul,” he told me, “wishes to ask you one question, and the answer
is a yes or a no. This is the question: In case your Government wished
your services again, could she expect to receive them?”

“In case of war—yes,” I answered.

It was not very long before I received a telegram from Kueck. “Come,” was
all it said.




CHAPTER VII.

    _War. I re-enter the German service and am appointed aide to
    Captain von Papen. The German conception of neutrality and how
    to make use of it. The plot against the Welland Canal._


The meaning of Kueck’s telegram was plain. War had come at last, the war
that we had expected and prepared for during so many years. My country
was at war and I must leave whatever I was doing and return to its
service.

I went to Raul Madero with the telegram.

“It has come,” I said. “War. I shall have to go.”

We had spoken together too often, during the past few weeks, of my duty
in the event of hostilities, for any long discussion to be necessary now.
I asked for and received all that I believed to be necessary—a leave of
absence for six months with the privilege of extension. The next day,
August 3, 1914, I said good-bye to my troops and to my commander and
hastened north to El Paso.

At the Hotel el Paso del Norte, I met my former enemies, Kueck and his
stout secretary. We had dinner together and he gave me letters containing
instructions to proceed to New York and to place myself at the disposal
of Captain Franz von Papen, the German military attaché at Washington.

“When will Captain von Papen be in New York?” I asked.

“I have just received a communication from Papen,” replied Kueck, adding
with a gratified smile, “I am keeping him informed of conditions along
the border. He will be in New York two weeks from to-day.”

There was no necessity for haste then, and I remained in El Paso for five
days longer, keeping my eyes and ears open and learning, among other
things, more “facts” about Mexico than I could have acquired in Mexico
itself in a life time. “There are lies, damned lies and El Pasograms,”
some one has said. I collected enough of the last-named to cheer me on my
way to Washington and to make me marvel that Rome had ever been called
the father of lies. No wonder newspaper correspondents like to report
Mexican news from El Paso.

[Illustration: Dr. Kraske’s letter addressed to “Baron von der Goltz,”
arranging for an appointment with Captain von Papen. Translated it reads:

                                          New York, August 21, 1914.

    DEAR HERR VON DER GOLTZ:

    I am very sorry not to have found you in after another
    engagement. I was unable to come round and try to catch you.

    I had arranged a meeting for yesterday morning between you and
    a gentleman who is interested in you.

    If you call on me to-morrow morning at whatever time is
    convenient to you, I shall probably be able to arrange another
    interview.

                              I am, etc.,

                                                         DR. KRASKE.]

Washington was technically on vacation at the time, but there was an
unwonted air of excitement about the city—far greater than formerly
existed when Congress was in full session. At the German Embassy I found
only a few clerks; but letters from Newport, to which the Ambassador and
his staff had gone for the summer, informed me that Captain von Papen
would meet me in New York in a fortnight. And then I learned for the
first time that it was impossible for me to reach Germany, but that I was
to be assigned to work in the United States.

I knew what that meant, of course, and I was not wholly unprepared for
it. Secret agents could be very useful in a neutral country, and I knew
from my acquaintance with German methods in Europe, that plans would
already have been made for conserving German interests in the United
States. What those plans were I did not know; but my only immediate
concern was to remove any possible suspicion from myself by doing
something that on the surface would seem to be absolutely idiotic.

I became violently and noisily pro-German. On the train I entered into
arguments (as a matter of fact I could not have escaped them if I tried)
in which I stoutly defended the invasion of Belgium and prophesied an
early victory for Germany. And when I arrived in New York I registered
at the Holland House, where my actions would be more conspicuous than
at one of the larger hotels, and proceeded to make myself as noticeable
as possible by spending a great deal more money than I could afford—and
talking. In a day or two the reporters were on my trail and I became
their obliging prey. What I told them I do not now remember in its
entirety, but newspaper clippings of the day assure me that I made many
wild and bombastic statements, promising that Paris would be captured
in a very few weeks—in a word uttering the most flagrant nonsense. The
reporters decided that I was a fool and deftly conveyed that impression
to their readers. And in a very brief time I had the satisfaction of
learning that I was everywhere regarded as a person of considerably more
loquacity than intelligence.

That was the very reputation I had attempted to get. I wanted to be
known—and widely—as a braggart, a spendthrift, a rattlebrain, for the
very excellent reason that in no other way could I so easily divert
suspicion from myself later on. I was a German, and consequently under
the surveillance of enemy secret agents, with whom—oh, believe me!—the
United States was filled. It was impossible for me to escape some
notice. Since that was the case, the safest course for me to pursue was
to comport myself in such a way that all interested persons would report
(as I afterwards learned they did report) that I was not worth watching,
since no sane government would ever employ me.

While I was engaged in achieving this enviable reputation, I had managed
to keep in touch with the Imperial German Consulate in New York, and
on August 21 I had received from the Vice-Consul, Dr. Kraske, a note
informing me that “the gentleman who is interested in you”—Captain von
Papen—“will meet you next morning at the Consulate.” That letter was to
figure two years later in the trial of Captain Hans Tauscher. I reproduce
it here. You might note that it is addressed to “Baron von der Goltz,”
although my card did not bear that title, and I had registered at the
Holland House under my Mexican military title of Major.

Upon the following morning I went to that old building at Number Eleven
Broadway. There in a little room in the offices of the Imperial German
Consulate began a series of meetings that were designed to bear fruit of
the greatest consequences to the United States—that would, had they been
successful, have made American neutrality a lie and would have perhaps
drawn the United States into a serious conflict with England, if not into
actual war.

I remember von Papen’s enthusiasm as he outlined the general program
to me. “It was merely a question of tying their hands”—that was the
burden of his statements, time and again. We could hope for nothing from
American neutrality; it was a fraud, a deception. Washington could not
see the German viewpoint at all. Everything was done to favor England.
Why, the entire country was supporting the allies—the government,
the press, the people—all of them! Nowhere was there a good word for
Germany. And that in spite of the excellent propaganda that Germany was
conducting. I remember that the failure of German propaganda was an
especially sore spot with him.

“How about the German-Americans?” I asked him upon one occasion.

He made a sound that was between a grunt and a cough.

“I am attending to them,” was his reply. I did not understand what he
meant until much later.

We talked much of American participation in the war in those days. Papen
was convinced that it would come sooner or later; and certainly upon the
side of the Entente—unless the German-Americans could be brought into
line. They were being attended to, he would repeat, but meantime it was
necessary for us to decide upon some immediate action. Of course there
was Mexico to be considered. It was too bad that Huerta had fallen. What
did I think of Villa? Could he be persuaded to cause a diversion if the
United States abandoned its neutrality?

I told him that I thought it very unlikely. “He is not very friendly
toward Germans,” I said, “and he appreciates the importance of keeping
on good terms with the United States. No, I don’t think you can reach
him—now. Later on, he may take a different attitude—when we have had a
few more victories.”

Von Papen nodded. I was probably right, he thought. We must show these
ignorant people how powerful the Germans were. It would have a great
moral effect. But that was for the future. Meantime what did I think of
this letter as a suggestion for possible immediate action?

“This letter” was from a man named Schumacher, who lived in Oregon, at
Eden Bower Farm. He had written to the Embassy, suggesting that we
secretly fit out motor boats armed with machine guns, and using Buffalo,
Detroit, Cleveland and Chicago as bases, make raids upon Canadian cities
and towns on the Great Lakes.

There were some good features to the plan—its value as a means of
terrorizing Canadians, for instance—but it was doubtful whether at that
time we could carry it out successfully. Then, too, we could not be sure
whether it was not merely a trap for us. Papen had been making inquiries
about Schumacher and was not entirely satisfied as to his good faith.

There were a number of other schemes which we considered at this time.
One was to equip reservists of the German Army, then in the United
States, and co-operating with German warships then in the Pacific Ocean
to invade Canada from the State of Washington. This plan was abandoned
because of the impossibility of securing enough artillery for our
purposes.

Another plan that we considered more carefully, involved an expedition
against Jamaica. This was a much more feasible scheme than any that had
been proposed thus far, and we spent many days over it. Jamaica was none
too well defended, and it seemed fairly probable that with an army of
ragamuffins which I could easily recruit in Mexico and Central America,
we could make a success of it. Arms were easy to secure; in fact, we had
a very well equipped arsenal in New York; and filibustering had become
so common since the outbreak of the Mexican revolution, that it would be
easy to obtain what additional material we needed without disclosing our
purpose. On the whole the idea looked promising, and matters had gone
so far that von Papen secured my appointment as captain, so that in the
event of my being captured on British soil with arms in my hand, I should
be treated as a prisoner of war.

Then just when we were making final preparations for my departure from
New York, von Papen came to me in great excitement and said he had come
upon a plan that would serve our purposes to perfection. Canada was,
after all, our principal objective; we could strike a telling blow
against it, and at the same time create consternation throughout America
by blowing up the canals which connected the Great Lakes!

“It is comparatively simple,” said von Papen. “If we blow up the locks of
these canals, the main railway lines of Canada and the principal grain
elevators will be crippled. Immediately we shall destroy one of England’s
chief sources of food supply as well as hamper the transportation of war
materials. Canada will be thrown into a panic and public opinion will
_demand_ that her troops be held for home defense. But best of all, it
will make the Canadians believe that the thousands of German reservists
and the millions of German-Americans in the United States are planning
active military operations against the Dominion.”

I looked at him in surprise. Where had he got such a plan? Papen
enlightened me with his next words.

Two men—not Germans but violently anti-English—had come to him with the
suggestion, he said. It was in a very indefinite form as yet, but the
idea was certainly worth careful consideration. He wished me to discuss
the matter with the two men at my hotel.

It did seem a good plan. As I discussed it the next evening with the two
men, whom von Papen had sent to me, it seemed entirely practicable and
immensely important. Together we went over the maps and diagrams they had
brought with them, which showed the vulnerable points of the different
canals and railways. After a number of conferences with them and with von
Papen, the plot took definite shape as a plan to blow up the Welland
Canal.

“It can be done,” I told von Papen one day, and together we discussed the
details. Finally von Papen looked up from the notes we had been examining.

“I think it will do admirably,” he said. “Will you undertake it?”

I nodded.

“Good,” said von Papen. “I shall leave the details to you—but keep me
informed of your needs and I shall see that they are taken care of.”

So began the plot which was literally to carry the war into America. My
first need was for men, and for help in getting these I appealed to von
Papen, who obligingly furnished me with a letter of introduction—made out
in the name of Bridgman H. Taylor—to Mr. Luederitz, the German Consul at
Baltimore. There were several German ships interned at that port, and we
felt that we should have no difficulty in recruiting our force from them.

Before I went to Baltimore, however, I did engage one man, Charles
Tucker, alias Tuchhaendler, who had already had some dealings with the
two men who originally proposed the scheme.

Tucker accompanied me to Baltimore, and together we paid a visit to
Consul Luederitz. The consul glanced at the letter I presented to him.

“Captain von Papen requests me to give you all the assistance you may ask
for, Major von der Goltz,” he said, intimating by the use of my name that
he had previously been informed of the enterprise. “I shall be happy to
do anything in my power. What is it you wish?”

Men, I told him, were my chief need at the moment. He said that there
should be no difficulty about securing them. There was a German ship in
the harbor at the time, and we could doubtless make use of part of the
crew and an officer, if we desired. He offered me his visiting card, on
the back of which he wrote a note of recommendation to the captain of the
ship. But while we were talking this man entered the office and we made
our preliminary arrangements there.

The following day, a Sunday, Tucker and I visited the ship and after
dinner selected our men, who were informed of their prospective duties. I
also listened to the news that was being received on board by wireless;
for the captain was still allowed to receive messages, although the
harbor authorities had forbidden him to use his apparatus for sending
purposes.

I needed nothing more in Baltimore, so far as my present plans were
concerned, but at Consul Luederitz’s suggestion, I decided to furnish
myself with a passport, made out in my _nom de guerre_ of Bridgman
Taylor. Luederitz was of the opinion that it might be useful at some
future time as a means of proving that I was an American citizen, and
accordingly we had one of the clerks make out an application, which was
duly forwarded to Washington; and on August 31st the State Department
furnished the non-existent Mr. Bridgman H. Taylor with a very comforting,
although as it turned out, a decidedly dangerous document. One other
thing I needed at the moment—a pistol, for my own was out of order. This
Mr. Luederitz provided me with, from the effects of an Austrian who had
committed suicide in Baltimore, not long before, and whose property, in
the absence of an Austrian Consulate in the city, had been turned over to
the German Consul.

The days immediately following my return to New York were filled with
preparations for our coup. I engaged three additional men to act as my
lieutenants, acquainted them with the main objects of our plan and
agreed to pay them daily while in New York, and to add a bonus when our
enterprise should succeed. These men had all been well recommended to me,
and I knew I could trust them thoroughly. One, Fritzen, who was later
captured in Los Angeles, had been a purser on a Russian ship. A second,
Busse, was a commercial agent who had lived for many years in England;
the third bore the Italian name of Covani.

Meantime I saw von Papen frequently, and had on one occasion received
from him a check for two hundred dollars, which I needed for the sailors
who were coming from Baltimore. That check, which is reproduced in this
book, was to prove a singularly disastrous piece of paper, for in order
to avoid connecting my name with that of von Papen, it was made out to
Bridgman Taylor. I cashed it through a friend, Frederick Stallforth,
whose brother, Alberto Stallforth, had been the German Consul at Parral
when I was there. He, incidentally, was later implicated in the Rintelen
trial and was detained for a time on Ellis Island, from which he was
subsequently released.

Mr. Stallforth lifted his eyebrows when he saw the name on the check. I
smiled.

“I am Bridgman Taylor,” I told him. He laughed, but said nothing, merely
getting the check cashed for me at the German Club on Central Park South,
of which he was a member.

In a few days everything was ready. My men had arrived from Baltimore,
my plans were definitely made—I needed but one thing: the explosives.
These, von Papen told me, I could obtain through Captain Hans Tauscher,
the American agent of the Krupps, which means, in effect, the German
Government.

It has been asserted many times in the last year that the charges
against Capt. Tauscher were utterly unfounded. It is easy to understand
the motives of this gentleman’s defenders. There are many people still
in this country whose friendship with the amiable captain would wear a
decidedly suspicious look were his complicity in the anti-American plots
of the first two years of the war to be proved. I shall not quarrel
with these people. But reproduced in this book are four documents, the
originals of which are in the possession of the Department of Justice,
which tell their own story to the curious and are a fair indication of
the way I secured the explosives I needed for my expedition.

These documents show:

First, that on September 5, 1914, Captain Tauscher, American
representative of the Krupps, ordered from the du Pont de Nemours Powder
Company, 300 pounds of sixty per cent. dynamite to be delivered to
bearer, “Mr. Bridgman Taylor,” and to be charged to Captain Tauscher.

Second, that on September 11th, the du Pont Company sent Captain Tauscher
a bill for the same amount of dynamite delivered to Bridgman Taylor,
New York City, on September 5th; and on September 16th, they sent him a
second bill for forty-five feet of fuse delivered to Bridgman Taylor on
September 13th—the total of the two bills amounting to $31.13.

Third, that on December 29, 1914, Tauscher sent a bill to Captain von
Papen for a total amount of $503.24. _The third item, dated September
11th, was for $31.13._

Is it difficult to tell of whom I got my explosives or who eventually
paid for them? I got the dynamite at any rate, by calling for it myself
at one of the company’s barges in a motor boat, and taking it away in
suitcases. At 146th Street and the Hudson River we left the boat, and,
carrying the explosives with us, went to the German Club, where I applied
to von Papen for automatic pistols, batteries, detonators, and wire for
exploding the dynamite. Von Papen promised them in two or three days—and
he kept his word.[3]

[Illustration: Before going to Baltimore, “Mr. Bridgeman Taylor”—Captain
von der Goltz—received this letter from Capt. von Papen. Translated it
reads:

                                             New York, 27. VIII. 14.

    I request the Consuls in Baltimore and St. Paul to give the
    bearer of this letter—Mr. Bridgeman Taylor—all the assistance
    he may ask for.

                            VON PAPEN,
                            Captain in the General Staff of the Army
                            and Military Attaché.]

Bit by bit, all this material was removed from the German Club—in
suitcases and via taxi-cab. They were exciting little rides we took
those days, and my heart was often in my mouth when our chauffeur turned
corners in approved New York fashion. But luckily there were no accidents
and in a day or so all of our materials were stored away; part of them
in my apartments—not in the Holland House, alas!—but in a cheap section
of Harlem. For von der Goltz, the spendthrift, the braggart, was seen no
longer in the gay places of New York. He had spent all his money, and
now, no longer of interest to the newspapers—or to the secret agents of
the allies—had taken a two dollar and a half room in Harlem where he
could repent his follies—and be as inconspicuous as he pleased.

So it came about that toward the middle of September we five—Fritzen,
Busse, Tucker, Covani and myself—took train for Buffalo, armed with
dynamite, automatic guns, detonators and other necessary implements,
and proceeded absolutely unmolested, to go to Buffalo. There I engaged
rooms at 198 Delaware Avenue and began to reconnoitre the ground. I made
a trip or two over the Niagara River via aëroplane, with an aviator
who unquestionably thought me mad and charged accordingly; and at the
suggestion of von Papen, I secured money for my expenses from a Buffalo
lawyer, John Ryan.

It had been decided that von Papen should let us know when the
Canadian troops were about to leave camp so that we might strike at
the psychological moment. A telegram came from him, signed with the
non-committal name of Steffens, telling me that Ryan had money and
instructions. Ryan gave me the money, as I have stated, but insisted that
he had no instructions whatever.

Then, after a stay of several days in Niagara, during which we did
nothing but exchange futile telegrams with Ryan and “Mr. Steffens”—we
learned that the first contingent of Canadian troops had left the
camp—and my men and I returned to New York, unsuccessful.

Our failure was greater than appears on the surface, for my men and
I were a blind. Our equipment, our loud talking, our aggressive
pro-Germanism—even our secret preparations, which had not been secret
enough—were intended primarily to distract attention from other and far
more dangerous activities.

We had been watched by United States Secret Service men from the very
beginning of our enterprise. During our entire stay in Buffalo and
Niagara, we had been under the surveillance of men who were merely
waiting for us to make their suspicions a certainty by some positive
attempt against the peace of the United States. We _knew_ it and wanted
it to be so.

And while they were waiting for sufficient cause to arrest us, other men,
totally unsuspected, were making their way down through Canada, intent
upon destroying _all_ of the bridges and canal locks in the lake region!

You can see what the effect would have been had our plan succeeded—Canada
crippled and terrorized—England robbed of the troops which Canada was
even then preparing to send her, but which would have been forced to
remain at home to defend the border. But far more desirable in German
eyes, the United States would have been convicted in the sight of the
world of criminal negligence. For my band of men—the obvious perpetrators
of one crime had been acting suspiciously for weeks. And yet, in spite
of that, we were at liberty. _The United States had made no effort to
apprehend us._

Good fortune saved the United States from serious international
complications at that time. While we were waiting for word from von Papen
the Canadian troops had left Valcartier Camp, and were then on their way
to England. Part of our object had been removed, and for the rest—well,
the plan would keep, we thought.

It was a disappointed von Papen whom I met on my return to New York—a
rather crest-fallen person, far different from the urbane soldier that
Washington knew in those days. We commiserated with each other upon our
failure, and talked of the better luck that we should have next time. I
did not know that there was to be no next time for me.

For it came about that Abteilung III B., the Intelligence Department of
the General Staff wished some first-hand information about conditions in
the United States and in Mexico; and I, who knew both countries (and who
was the possessor of an American passport bearing an American name) was
selected to go.

On October 3rd, 1914, Bridgman Taylor waved farewell to New York from
the deck of an Italian steamer, bound for Genoa. The curious might have
been interested to know that in Mr. Taylor’s trunk were letters of
recommendation to various German Consuls in Italy; strangely enough, they
bore the name of Horst von der Goltz within them, and the signature of
each was “von Papen.”

I had said good-bye to von Papen the night before, at the German Club. He
had asked me to turn over to him all the fire-arms I had, for use again
when needed.

We talked of the war that night, and of Germany, which I had not seen in
two years. And we spoke of the United States, and of what I was to tell
them “over there.”

“Say that they need not worry about this country,” he told me. “The
United States may still join us in the splendid fight we are making. But
if they do not it is of small moment. _And always remember that if things
look bad for us, something will happen over here._”

I left him, speculating upon the “something” that would happen; for then
I did not know of all the plans that were in my captain’s head. I was to
learn more about them later on—and I was to know a bitter disgust at the
things that men may do in the name of patriotism. But of those things I
will speak in their proper place.




CHAPTER VIII.

    _I go to Germany on a false passport. Italy in the early days
    of the war. I meet the Kaiser and talk to him about Mexico and
    the United States._


It was peaceful sailing in those early days of the war, and our ship, the
_Duca d’Aosta_, reached Genoa with no mishap. I had but one moment of
trepidation on the voyage, for on the last day the ship was hailed by a
British cruiser. Here, I thought, was where I should put my passport to
the test, but as it happened, our ship was not searched. An officer came
alongside inquiring, among other things, if there were any Germans on
board, but he accepted the captain’s assurance that there were none—to my
great relief.

Genoa, like all the rest of the world, was in a state of great excitement
in those days. Rumors as to the possible course of the Italian Government
were flying about everywhere, and one could hear in an hour as many
conflicting statements of the Government’s intentions as he might
wish. The country was a battlefield of the propagandists at the moment.
Nearly all of the German consuls, who had been forced to leave Africa at
the declaration of war, had taken up their quarters in Italy, and were
busily disseminating pro-German literature of all sorts. I was told,
too, that the French Ambassador had already spent large sums of money
buying Italian papers, in which to present the Allied cause to the as
yet neutral people of Italy. And when I went into the office of the
Imperial German Consul General, von Nerf, I was amused to see a huge
pile of copies of—of all papers in the world!—the Berlin _Vorwaerts_,
which had been imported for distribution throughout the country. Here
was a pretty comedy! That newspaper, which during its entire existence
had been the bitterest foe of German autocracy in the Empire, had become
a propagandist sheet for its former enemy and was now being used as a
lure for the hesitating sympathies of the Italian people! In German,
French and Italian editions it was spread about the country, carrying the
message of Teutonic righteousness to the uninformed.

I found von Nerf to be a large man, with whiskers that recalled those
of Tirpitz, although without that gentleman’s temperament or embonpoint.
He assured me that Italy would never enter the war; there were too many
factions in the country which would oppose such a step.

“Why, consider,” he bade me, “we have the three most important parties
on our side. The Catholics will never consent to a break with Germany;
the business men are all our staunch partisans; and the Labor Party is
too violently opposed to war ever to consider entering it. Besides,” he
continued, “laboring men all over the world know that it is in Germany
that the Labor Party has reached its greatest strength. Why, then, should
they consider taking sides against us?”

“But do you think that there is any chance of Italy entering the war on
our side?” I asked him.

Von Nerf shrugged his shoulders. “It is doubtful,” was his reply. “What
could they do in their situation?”

I had come to von Nerf with von Papen’s letter of introduction, to ask
for assistance in reaching Germany. Accordingly he arranged for my
passage, and soon I was on a train bound for Milan and Kufstein, where I
was to change for the train to Munich. At that time the German consuls
were paying the passage of thousands of Germans who wished to leave Italy
for service in the army. The train on which I traveled was full of these
volunteers, who later disembarked at Kufstein, on the Austro-German
border, to report to the military authorities there.

At Munich we passed some wounded who were being taken from the front—the
first real glimpse of the war that I had had. There was little evidence
of any war-feeling in the Bavarian capital; restaurants were crowded, and
everyone was light-hearted and confident of victory. I saw few signs of
any hatred there, or elsewhere during my stay in Germany. All that there
was was directed against England; France was universally respected, and I
heard only expressions of regret that she was in the war.

On the train from Munich to Berlin I had the first good meal I had eaten
in several weeks. It was good to sit down to something besides miles
of spaghetti and indigestible anchovies. And the price was only two
marks—for that was long before the days of the Food Controller and $45
ham.

Berlin was filled with Austrian officers, some of them belonging to
motor batteries—the famous ’32’s—which had been built before the war in
the Krupp factories, not for Germany—for that would have occasioned
additional armaments on the part of France—but by Austria, who could
increase her strength without suspicion. The city, always martial in
appearance, had changed less than one would have expected. There, too,
the restaurants were filled; in particular the Piccadilly, which had been
rechristened the Fatherland, and was enjoying an exceptional popularity
in consequence. One was wise to go early if he wished to secure a table
there; and that fortunate person could see the dining-room filled with
happy crowds, eating and drinking, and applauding vociferously when _Die
Wacht am Rhein_ or some other patriotic air was played.

I had returned to Germany for two purposes; to fight and to bring full
details of conditions in Mexico and the United States to the War Office.
One of my first official visits was paid to the Foreign Office, where I
found every one busy with routine matters and very little concerned about
the success or failure of the German propaganda in Italy—an attitude in
marked contrast to that of the General Staff. There the first question
asked me related to conditions in Italy. This indifference of the Foreign
Office would seem, in the light of after events, to indicate a false
security on the Ministry’s part; but in reality the facts are otherwise.
Germany had never expected Italy to enter the war on the side of the
Central Powers; she did hope that her former ally would remain neutral,
and at that time was doing her utmost to keep her so, both by propaganda
and by assuring her of a supply of coal and other commodities, for which
Italy had formerly depended upon England, and which Germany now hoped
to secure for her from America. But even at the time of my visit the
indications of Italy’s future course were fairly clear—and the Foreign
Office was accepting its failure with as good grace as could be mustered
to the occasion.

But if the Foreign Office was indifferent to the attitude of Italy, it
was intensely interested in that of Turkey, which had not yet entered
the war. It seemed to me as if Mannesmann and Company, a house whose
interests in the Orient are probably more extensive than those of any
other German company, seemed almost to have taken possession of the
Colonial Office, so many of its employees were in evidence there: and
I had an extended conference with Bergswerkdirektor Steinmann, who had
formerly been in charge of the Asia Minor interests of this company.
Mexico, of course, was the principal topic of our conversation, but many
times he spoke of Turkey and of the small doubt that existed as to her
future course of action.

[Illustration: Captain Tauscher’s order upon the du Pont de Nemours
Powder Company for explosives to be delivered to “Bridgeman Taylor” and
a bill for “merchandise” charged to Captain von Papen. The third item on
Tauscher’s bill corresponds with the amount of the two bills shown in the
preceding illustrations. The four photographs indicate how von der Goltz
secured ammunition for the Welland Canal Enterprise.]

Next door to the Foreign Office, every corner of which was a-hum with
busy clerks and officials, stood the house to which I had been taken
from Gross Lichterfelde so many years before—“Samuel Mayer’s Bude.” It
was very quiet and empty to outward appearance; and yet from within that
silent, deserted house, I think it safe to say, the destiny of Europe was
being directed. It was there that the Kaiser spent his days, when he was
in Berlin. And it was there that the Imperial Chancellor had his office
and determined more than any man except the Kaiser, the policies of the
Empire.

One entered the house, going directly into a large room that was occupied
no longer by the round-faced man of my cadet days, but by Assessor
Horstman, the head of the Intelligence Department of the Foreign Office.
Upstairs was the private office of the Emperor, and, to the rear of that,
the Nachrichten Bureau—a newspaper propaganda and intelligence office,
directed by the Kaiser and under the charge of Legation-Secretary Weber.

I visited the Turkish Legation, at the suggestion of Herr Steinmann, and
discussed at length and very seriously with the Ambassador the attitude
of Italy and its effect upon Turkey’s possible entry into the war. He
assured me that the only thing necessary to make Turkey take part in the
conflict was a guarantee that Germany was capable of handling the Italian
situation, and that whatever Italy might do would not affect Turkish
interests.

But it was with the General Staff that my chief business was. At the
outbreak of hostilities this—the “War Office” so-called—had become two
organizations. One, devoted to the actual supervision of the forces in
the field, had its headquarters in Charleville, France, far behind the
battle front; the other branch remained in the dingy old building on the
Koenig’s Platz, in which it had always been quartered. It is here that
the army department of “Intelligence,” officially known as Abteilung III
B., is located, and it was to this department that I had been assigned.

[Illustration: Bills from the du Pont de Nemours Powder Company for
explosives delivered to “Bridgeman Taylor” and charged to Captain
Tauscher.]

Von Papen had, of course, communicated to Berlin an account of our
various activities and there was little that I could add to the
information the department possessed about conditions in the United
States. Mexico seemed rather the chief point of interest, and Major
Köhnemann, to whom I spoke, asked innumerable questions about the
attitude of Villa towards both the United States and Germany; what I
thought of his chances of ultimate success, and whether I believed that
he, if he succeeded, would be more friendly to Germany than Carranza
was at the time. After an hour of such discussion, which more closely
resembled a cross-examination, he suddenly rose.

“Your information is of great interest, Captain von der Goltz,” he said.
“I shall ask you to return here at five o’clock this evening. Wear your
heaviest underclothing. You are going to see the Emperor.”

I started. Prussian officers do not joke, as a rule, but for the life of
me, I could not see any sane connection between his last two remarks. The
major must have noticed my perplexity, for he smiled as he continued.

“You are going to travel by Zeppelin,” he explained. “It will be very
cold.”

That night I drove by motor to a point on the outskirts of the city,
where a Zeppelin was moored. It was one of those which had formerly
been fitted up for passenger service, and was now used when quick
transportation of a small number of men was necessary. There were several
officers of the General Staff whose immediate presence at Coblenz, where
the Emperor had stationed himself, was needed; and since speed was
essential we were to travel this way.

The miles that lay between Berlin and Coblenz seemed but so many rods to
me, as I sat in the salon of the great airship, resting and talking to my
fellow passengers. One would have thought that we had been traveling but
a few moments when suddenly there loomed below us in the moonlight, the
twin fortresses of Ehrenbreitstein and Coblenz, each built upon a high
plateau. Between them, in the valley, the lights of the city shone dimly;
in the center of the town was the Schloss, where the Emperor awaited us.

But I did not see the Emperor that night. Instead, I was shown to a room
in the castle—a room lighted by candle—and there my attendant bade me
goodnight.

At half-past three I was awakened by a knock at the door. “Please dress,”
said a voice. “His Majesty wishes to see you at four o’clock.”

It was still dark when at four o’clock I entered that room on the ground
floor of the castle where the Emperor of Emperors worked and ate and
slept. In the dim light I saw him, bent over a table on which was piled
correspondence of all kinds. He did not seem to have heard me enter the
room, and as he continued to work, signing paper after paper with great
rapidity, I looked down and noticed that, in my haste to appear before
him on time, I had dressed completely save for one thing. I was in my
stocking feet.

I coughed to announce my presence. He looked up then, and I saw that he
wore a Litewka, that undress military jacket which is used by soldiers
for stable duty, and which German officers wear sometimes in their homes.
But the face that met mine, startled me almost out of my composure; for
it was more like the countenance of Pancho Villa than that of Wilhelm
Hohenzollern. That face, as a rule so majestic in its expression, was
drawn and lined; his hair was disarranged and showed numerous bald
patches which it ordinarily covered. And his moustaches—for so many years
the target of friend and foe and which were always pointed so arrogantly
upward—drooped down and gave him a dispirited look that I had never seen
him wear before.

In a word, it was an extremely nervous and not a stolid, Teutonic person
who sat before me in that room. And it was not an assertive, but merely
a very tired human being, who finally addressed me.

“I am sorry to have been obliged to call you at this hour,” he said, “but
I am very busy and it is important that I should see you.”

And then instead of ordering me to report to him, instead of commanding
me to tell him those things which I had been sent to tell him, this
autocrat, this so-called man of iron, spoke to me as one man to another,
almost as a friend speaks to a friend.

I do not remember all that we spoke of in that half hour—the three years
that have passed have brought me too much of experience for me to recall
clearly more than the general tenor of our conversation. It is his manner
that I remember most vividly, and the general impression of the scene.
For as I stood before him then, it suddenly seemed to me that he spoke
and looked as a man will who is confronted by a problem that for the
moment has staggered him—not because of its immensity but because he sees
now that he has always misunderstood it.

Here, I thought, is a man, accustomed to facing all issues with grand
words and a show of arrogance; and now at a time when oratory is of
no avail, he finds himself still indomitable, perhaps, but a trifle
lost, a trifle baffled, when he contemplates the work before him. For
Wilhelm II had labored for years to prevent, or if that were impossible,
to come victoriously through, the crisis which he knew must some day
develop, and which he himself had at last precipitated. He had striven
constantly to entrench Germany in a position that would command the
world; and had sought to concentrate, so far as may be, the trouble
spots of the world into one or two, to the end that Germany, when the
time came, might extinguish them at a blow. But the time had come, and
he knew that despite his efforts, there were not two but many issues
that must be faced, and each one separately. He had striven with a sort
of perverted altruism, to prepare the world for those things which he
believed to be right and which, therefore, must prevail. And now after
long years of preparation, of diplomatic intrigue with its record of
nations bribed, threatened or cajoled into submission or alliance, he
was faced with a condition which gave the lie to his expectations and
he knew that “failure” must be written across the years. Russia, Japan,
were for the moment lost; Italy was making ready to cast itself loose
from that alliance which had been so insecurely founded upon distrust.
And in America—who could tell? And yet, for all that I read weariness
and bewilderment in his every tone, I could find in him no trace of
hesitation or uncertainty. Instead, I knew that running through every
fibre of the man there was an unquestioning assurance of victory—a
victory that must come!

While I stood there imagining these things, he spoke of our aims in
Europe and in America and of the things that must be done to bring them
to success. He bade me tell him the various details of our affairs
in Mexico and the United States; and he, like Köhnemann, was chiefly
interested in Mexico. It was in fact, almost suspicious, his interest was
so great; and I could explain it only in one way—that he viewed Mexico as
the ultimate battlefield of Japan and the United States in the next great
struggle—the struggle for the mastery of the Pacific. For just as Belgium
has been the battlefield of Europe, so must Mexico be the battleground of
America in that war which the future seems to be preparing.

I remember wondering, as he spoke of what might come to pass, at the
tremendous familiarity he displayed with the points of view of the
peoples and governments of both Americas. I had thought myself well
acquainted with conditions in both continents; but here was a man
separated by thousands of miles from the peoples of whom he talked, whose
knowledge was, nevertheless, more correct, as I saw it, than that of
anyone—Dernburg not excepted—whom I had met.

It was then, I think, that he told me what Germany wished of me,
outlining briefly those things which he thought I could do best.

“You can serve us,” he said, “in Turkey or in America. In the one you
will have an opportunity to fight as thousands of your countrymen are
fighting. In the other, you will have chosen a task that is not so
pleasant perhaps, and not less dangerous, but which will always be
regarded honorably by your Emperor, because it is work that must be done.
Which do you choose?”

I hesitated a moment.

“It shall be as your Majesty wishes,” I said finally.

He looked at me closely before he spoke again. “It is America, then.”

And then, as I bowed in acquiescence, he spoke once more—for the last
time so far as my ears are concerned.

“I must be ready by 7; my train leaves at 7.10. I may never see you
again, but I shall always know that you have done your duty. Good-bye.”

And so I left him—this man who is a menace to his people, not because
he is vicious or from any criminal intent; not, I believe, because his
personal ambitions are such that his country must bleed to satisfy them;
but merely because his mind is the outcome of a system and an education
so divorced from fact that he could not see the evil of his own position
if it were explained to him.

For in spite of his remarkable grasp of the facts of Empire, the deeper
human realities have passed him by. For years he has had a private
clipping bureau for his own information; but he does not know that he
has never seen any but the clippings that the Junkers—those who stood
to gain by the success of his present course—have wished him to see. He
does not know that he has been shut out from many chapters of the world’s
real history; or that this insidious censorship has kept from him those
things, which, I am sure, had he known in the days when his intellect was
susceptible to the influence of fact, would have made him a man instead
of an Emperor.

Here was a man who honestly believed that he was doing what was best
for his people, but so hopelessly warped by his training and so closely
surrounded by satellites that even had the truth borne wings, it could
not have reached him.

To me it seems that the menace of the Hohenzollerns lies in this: not
that they are worse than other men, not that they mean ill to the world,
but that time and experience have left them unaroused by what others know
as progress. They stand in the pathway of the world to-day, believing
themselves right and regarding themselves as victims of an oppressive
rivalry. They do not know that their viewpoint is as tragically perverted
as that of the fox who, feeling that he must live, steals the farmer’s
hens. But, like the farmer, the world knows only that it is injured; and
just as the farmer realizes that he must rid himself of the fox, so the
world knows, to-day, and says that the Hohenzollerns must go!




CHAPTER IX.

    _In England—and how I reached there. I am arrested and
    imprisoned for fifteen months. What von Papen’s baggage
    contained. I make a sworn statement._


Back in Berlin, I sought out Major Köhnemann, and together we spent many
days in planning my future course of action. It was a war council in
effect, for the object toward which we aimed was nothing less than the
crippling of the United States by a campaign of terrorism and conspiracy.
It was not pleasant work that I was to do, but I knew, as every informed
German did, that it was necessary. Therefore I accepted it.

What would you have? Germany was in the war to conquer or be conquered.
America, the source of supply for the Allies, stood in the way. Knowing
these things, we set about the task of preventing America from aiding
our enemies, by using whatever means we could. We did not feel either
compunction or hostility. It was war—diplomatic rather than military,
but war none the less.

I do not intend to go into the details of our plans at the present
moment. Those will have their place in a later chapter. Enough to say
that after a brief visit to both the eastern and western fronts I
left Germany for England—en route to America with a program that in
ruthlessness or efficiency left nothing to be desired.

But before going to England it was necessary that I take every possible
precaution against exposure there. My passport might be sufficient
identification, but I knew that since the arrest of Carl Lody and
other German spies in England, the British authorities were examining
passports with a great deal more care than they had formerly exercised.
Accordingly, one morning, Mr. Bridgman Taylor presented himself at the
American Embassy for financial aid with which to leave Germany. There was
good reason for this. To ask a consulate or embassy to visé a passport
when that is not necessary, may easily seem suspicious. But the applicant
for aid, receives not only additional identification in the form of
a record of his movements, but also secures an advantage in that his
passport bears an indorsement of his appeal for assistance, in my case
signed with the name of the Ambassador. At The Hague I again applied for
help from the United States Relief Commission. I amused myself on this
occasion by making two drafts; one for fifteen dollars on Mr. John F.
Ryan of Buffalo, N. Y., and one for thirty dollars on “Mr. Papen” of New
York City.

I was fairly secure, then, I thought. If suspicion did fall upon me, it
would be simple to prove that I had submitted my passport to a number of
American officials, and had consequently satisfied them of my good faith
as well as that the passport had not been issued to some one other than
myself, as in the case of Lody.

As a final step I took care to divide my personal papers into two groups:
those which were perfectly harmless, such as my Mexican commission and
leave of absence, and those which would tend to establish my identity as
a German agent. These I deposited in two separate safe-deposit vaults in
Rotterdam, taking care to remember in which each group was placed—and
that done, with a feeling of personal security, and even a certain amount
of zest for the adventure, I boarded a channel steamer for England.

I was absolutely safe, I felt. In my confidence, I went about very
freely, ignoring the fact that England was at the moment in the throes
of a spy-scare, and even so well-recommended a German-American as Mr.
Bridgman Taylor, was not likely to escape scrutiny.

And yet, I believe that I should not have been caught at all, if I had
not stopped one day in front of the Horse Guards and joined the crowd
that was watching guard mount. Why I did it, it is impossible for me to
say. There was no military advantage to be gained; that is certain. And
I had seen guard mount often enough to find no element of novelty in it.
Whim, I suppose, drew me there; and as luck would have it, it drew into
a particularly congested portion of the crowd. And then chance played
another card, by causing a small boy to step on my foot. I lost my temper
and abused the lad roundly for his carelessness—so roundly in fact that a
man standing in front of me turned around and looked into my face.

I recognized him at once as an agent of the Russian Government, whom I
had once been instrumental in exposing as a spy in Germany. I saw him
look at me closely for a moment and I could tell by his expression,
although he said no word, that he had recognized me also. Thrusting
a penny into the boy’s hand, I made haste to get out of the crowd as
quickly as I could.

Here was a pleasant situation, I thought, as I made my way very quietly
to my hotel. I could not doubt that the Russian would report me—but what
then? His word against mine would not convict me of anything, but it
might lead to an inconvenient period of detention. I sat down to consider
the situation.

After all, I decided, the situation was serious but not absolutely
hopeless. Unquestionably I should be reported to the police;
unquestionably a careful investigation would result in the discovery
that there was no Bridgman H. Taylor at the address in El Paso which I
had given to the Relief Commission at the Hague. For the rest, my accent
would prove only that I was of German blood; not that I was a German
subject.

So far, so bad. But what then? I had, in the safe deposit vaults at
Rotterdam, papers proving that I was a Mexican officer on leave. It would
be a simple matter to send for these papers, to admit that I was Horst
von der Goltz, and to state that I was in England _en route_ from a visit
to my family in Germany and now bound for Mexico to resume my services.
There remained but one matter to explain: why I was using an American
passport bearing a name that was not mine.

That should not be a difficult task. Huerta had been overthrown barely
a week before my leave of absence was issued. Carranza’s government had
not yet been recognized, and already my general, Villa, had quarreled
with him, so that it was impossible for me to procure a passport from
the Mexican Government. In my dilemma, I had taken advantage of the
offer of an American exporter, who had been kind enough to lend me his
passport, which he had secured and found he did not need at the time. As
for my name, it was not a particularly good one under which to travel in
England, so I had naturally been obliged to use the one on my passport.

It was a good story and had somewhat the appearance of truth. The
question was, would it be believed? Even if it were, it had its
disadvantages; for I should certainly be arrested as an enemy alien, and
after a delay fatal to all my plans, I should probably be deported. I
decided to try a bolder scheme.

In Parliamentary White Paper, Miscellaneous No. 13, (1916), you will find
a statement which explains my next step. “Horst von der Goltz,” it says,
“arrived in England from Holland on the fourth of November, 1914. He
offered information upon projected air raids, the source whence the Emden
derived her information as to British shipping, and how the Leipsic was
obtaining her coal supply. _He offered to go back to Germany to obtain
information and all he asked for in the first instance was his traveling
expenses._”

What is the meaning of these amazing statements? Simply this. I realized
that even if the story I had concocted were believed it would mean
a considerable delay and ultimate deportation. And as I had no mind
to submit to either of these things if I could avoid them, I decided
to forestall my Russian friend by taking the only possible step—one
commendable for its audacity if for nothing else. Accordingly I walked
straight to Downing Street and into the Foreign Office. I asked to see
Mr. Campbell of the Secret Intelligence Department. This was walking into
the jaws of the lion with a vengeance.

I told Mr. Campbell that I wished to enter the British Secret Service;
that I was in a position to secure much valuable information.

“Upon what subject?” asked Mr. Campbell.

[Illustration: The check which almost cost von der Goltz his life. It was
this “Scrap of Paper” which was found among von Papen’s effects and which
enabled the British authorities to prove von der Goltz’s connection with
the German Government. In the British White Paper, Miscellaneous No. 6
(1916) is to be found this comment:

    Mr. Bridgeman Taylor: This person came over to England to offer
    himself for work under His Majesty’s Government. His real name
    is von der Goltz, and he is now in England.]

Zeppelin raids, I told him. I choose that subject first, because it was
the least harmful I could think of in case my “traitorous” offer ever
reached the ears of Berlin. No one knew better than I how impossible it
was to obtain information about Zeppelins. I reasoned that the officers
in command of Abteilung III B in the General Staff would know that I
was bluffing when I offered to get information upon that subject for
the English. They would know that I was not in a position to have or to
obtain any such knowledge, for in Germany no topic is so closely guarded
as that. Also, I reasoned that it was a topic in which the English were
vastly interested. They were.

Mr. Campbell was hesitating, so I added two other equally absurd
subjects, the movements of the _Emden_ and the _Leipsic_, about which I
knew—and the service chiefs knew that I knew—absolutely nothing.

Mr. Campbell was plainly puzzled. My intentions seemed to be good. At any
rate, I had come to him quite openly, and any ulterior motives I might
have had were not apparent. Then, too, I had offered him the key of my
safe deposit box, telling him what it contained. He considered a moment.

“We shall have to investigate your story,” he said finally. “We shall
send to Holland for the papers you say are contained in the vault there;
and you will be questioned further. In the meantime I shall have to place
you under arrest.”

I had expected nothing better than this, and went to my jail with a
feeling that was relief rather than anything else. My papers would
establish my identity and then, if all went well, I should go back to
Germany and make my way to America by another route.

But all did not go well. Somehow, in spite of my commission and leave of
absence—perhaps because my offer seemed too good to be true—the British
authorities decided that it would be better to lose the information I
had offered them and keep me in England. Whatever their suspicions, the
only charge they could bring against me and prove was that I was an
alien enemy who had failed to register. They had no proof whatever of
any connection between me and the German Government. So on the 13th of
November, 1914, they brought me into a London police court to answer
the charge of failing to register. I was delighted to do so. It was far
more comfortable than facing a court martial on trial for my life as
a spy, as the English newspapers had seemed to expect. Accordingly on
the 26th of November I was duly sentenced to six months at hard labor
in Pentonville Prison, with a recommendation for deportation at the
expiration of my sentence. I served five months at Pentonville—where
Roger Casement was hanged—and then my good behavior let me out. Home
Secretary MacKenna signed the order for my deportation. I was free. I was
to slip from under the paw of the lion.

And then something happened—to this day I don’t know what. Instead of
being deported I was thrust into Brixton Prison, where Kuepferer hanged
himself, strangely enough, just after his troubles seemed over. Kuepferer
had driven a bargain with the English. He was to give them information
in return for his life and freedom; and then, when he had everything
arranged, he committed suicide. In Brixton I was not sentenced on any
charge, I was simply held in solitary confinement, with occasional
diversions in the form of a “third degree.” After my first insincere
offer to give the English information I kept my mouth shut and made no
overtures to them, although I confess that the temptation to tell all
I knew was often very great. The English got nothing out of me and in
September, 1915, I was shifted to another prison. They took me out of
Brixton and placed me into Reading—the locale of Oscar Wilde’s ballad.
Conditions were less disagreeable there. I was allowed to have newspapers
and magazines, and to talk and exercise with my fellow prisoners.

You may be sure that all this time the English made attempts to solve my
personal identity as well as to learn the reason for my being in England.
They could not shake my story. Time after time I told them: “I am Horst
von der Goltz, an officer of the Mexican army on leave. I used the United
States passport made out to Bridgman Taylor from necessity—to avoid the
suspicion that would be attached to me because of my German descent.

“Gentlemen, that is all I can tell you.”

Over and over again I repeated that meagre statement to the men who
questioned me. I would not tell them the truth, and I knew that no lie
would help me. And then came an event which changed my viewpoint and made
me tell—if not the whole story—at least a considerable part of it.

I had, as I have said, managed to secure newspapers in my new quarters.
It is difficult to say how eagerly I read them after so many months of
complete ignorance, or with what anxiety I studied such war news as came
into my hands. It was America in which I was chiefly interested, for I
knew that after my capture, some other man must have been sent to do the
work which I had planned to do. I know now that it was von Rintelen who
was selected—that infinitely resourceful intriguer who planted his spies
throughout the United States, and for a time seemed well on the way to
succeeding in the most gigantic conspiracy against a peaceful nation
that had ever been undertaken. But at the time I could tell nothing of
this, although I watched unceasingly for reports of strikes, explosions
and German uprisings which would tell me that that work which I had been
commanded to do and from which I was only too glad to be spared, was
being prosecuted.

So several months passed—months in which I had time for meditation and in
which I began to see more clearly some things which had been hinted at in
Berlin—and of which I shall tell more later on. And then one day I read a
dispatch that caused me to sit very silently for a moment in my cell, and
to wonder—and fear a little.

Von Papen had been recalled.

I read the story of how he and Captain Boy-Ed had over-reached and
finally betrayed themselves; of the passport frauds that they had
conducted; of the conspiracies and sedition that they had sought to stir
up. I learned that they had been sent home under a safe-conduct which did
not cover any documents they might carry. It was this last fact which
caused me uneasiness. Had von Papen, always so confident of his success,
attempted to smuggle through some report of his two years of plotting? It
seemed improbable, and yet, knowing his tendency to take chances, I was
troubled by the possibility. For such a report might contain a record of
my connection with him—and I was not protected by a safe-conduct!

My fears were well-founded, as you know. Von Papen carried with him no
particular reports, but a number of personal papers which were seized
when his ship stopped at Falmouth.

In my prison I read of the seizure and was doubly alarmed; increasingly
so when the newspapers began publishing reports that they implicated
literally hundreds of Irish- and German-Americans whose services von
Papen had used in his plots. Then as the days passed, and my name was
not mentioned in the disclosures, I became relieved.

“After all,” I thought, “he knows that I am here in prison and that I
have kept silent. He will have been careful. These others—he has had some
reason for his incautiousness with them. But, he will not betray me, just
as he has betrayed none of his German associates.”

Then, on the night of January 30th, 1916, the governor of Reading Prison
informed me that I was to go to London the next day.

“Where to?” I asked.

“To Scotland Yard,” he said briefly.

“What for?”

“I do not know.”

My heart sank, for I realized at once that something had occurred which
was of vital import to me. I have faced firing squads in Mexico. I have
stood against a wall, waiting for the signal that should bid the soldiers
fire. And I have taken other dangerous chances, without, I believe,
more fear than another man would have known. But never have I felt
more reluctant than that night when I stood outside of Scotland Yard,
waiting—for what?

I was brought in to the office of the Assistant Commissioner and found
myself in the presence of four men, who regarded me gravely and in
silence. I had never seen them before, but later I learned their names:
Capt. William Hall of the Admiralty Intelligence Department; Mr. Nathan,
the Oriental expert of the Foreign Office; Captain Carter of the War
Office, and Mr. Basil Thompson, Assistant Commissioner of the Police of
London.

There was something tomb-like about the atmosphere of the room, I
thought, as I faced these men—and then I changed my opinion, for I
saw lying open on the table around which they were seated—a box of
cigarettes. I reached forward to take one, forgetting all politeness (for
I had not smoked in six weeks) when my eye caught sight of a little pink
slip of paper which one of them held in his hand—a slip which, I knew at
once, was the cause of my presence there.

It was Captain Hall who held the paper toward me. It read:

                                                  WASHINGTON, D. C.
                                                  September 1, 1914.

    The Riggs National Bank,

    Pay to the order of Mr. Bridgman Taylor two hundred dollars.

                                                       F. VON PAPEN.

When I had read it he turned over the check so that I could see the
endorsement.

They were all watching me. The room was very still. I could hear myself
breathe. Mr. Nathan of the Foreign Office handed me a pen and paper.

“Sign this name, please—Mr. Bridgman Taylor.”

I knew it would be folly to attempt to disguise my handwriting. I wrote
out my name. It corresponded exactly with the endorsement on the back of
the check.

“Do you know that check?” he asked.

“Yes,” I admitted, racking my wits for a possible explanation of the
affair.

“Why was it issued?”

I had an inspiration.

“Von Papen gave it to me to go to Europe and join the army—but you see I
didn’t——”

“Ah! Von Papen gave it to you.”

I was doing quick thinking. My first fright was over, but I realized
that that little check might easily be my death warrant. I knew that von
Papen had many reports and instructions bearing my name. I was afraid to
admit to myself that after all these months of security, I had at last
been discovered. Von Papen’s check proved that I had received money from
a representative of the German Government. There might be other papers
which would prove every thing needed to sentence me to execution. I was
groping around for an idea—and then in a flash I realized the truth. It
angered and embittered me.

There passed across my memory the year and more of solitary confinement,
during which I had held my tongue.

I swung around on the Englishmen.

“Are you the executioners of the German Government?” I asked. “Are you so
fond of von Papen that you want to do him a favor? If you shoot me you
will be obliging him.”

The four grave faces looked at me. “We are going to prosecute you on this
evidence,” was the only answer.

“You English pride yourselves,” I said, “on not being taken in. Von
Papen is a very clever man. Are you going to let him use you for his
own purposes? Do you think he was foolish enough not to realize that
those papers would be seized? Do you think”—this part of it was a random
shot, and lucky—“do you think it is an accident that the only papers
he carried, referring to a live, unsentenced man in England refer to
me? Just think! Von Papen has been recalled. The United States can
investigate his actions now without embarrassment. And he, knowing me
to be one of the connecting links in the chain of his activities, and
knowing that I am a prisoner liable to extradition, would ask nothing
better than to be permanently rid of me. And in the papers he carried he
very obligingly furnished you with incriminating evidence against me. You
can choose for yourselves. Do him this favor if you want to. But I think
I’m worth more to you alive than dead. Especially now that I see how very
willing my own government is to have me dead.”

The four men exchanged glances. I had made the appeal as a forlorn hope.
Would they accept it and the promise it implied? I could not tell from
their next words.

“We shall discuss that further,” said Captain Carter. “You will return to
Reading.”

The next few days were full of anxiety for me. I could not tell how
my appeal had been regarded, but I knew that it would be only by good
fortune that I should escape at least a trial for espionage—for that is
what my presence in England would mean. Finally I received a tentative
assurance of immunity if I should tell what I knew of the workings of
German secret agencies.

In spite of any hesitancy I might formerly have felt at such a course,
I decided to make a confession. Von Papen’s betrayal of me—for that he
had intentionally betrayed me, I was, and am, convinced—was too wanton
to arouse in me any feeling except a desire for my freedom, which for
fifteen months I had been robbed of, merely through the silence which
my own sense of honor imposed upon me. But I must be careful. I had no
desire to injure anyone whom von Papen had not implicated. And I did not
wish to betray any secret which I could safely withhold.

I speculated upon what other documents von Papen might have carried.
So far as I knew the only one involving me was the check; but of that
I could not be sure, nor did it seem likely. It was more probable that
there were other papers which would be used to test the sincerity of my
story. My aim was to tell only such things as were already known, or were
quite harmless. But how to do that? I needed some inkling as to what I
might tell and on what I must be silent.

That knowledge was difficult to obtain, but I finally secured it through
a rather adroit questioning of one of the men who interrogated me at the
time. He had shown me much courtesy and no little sympathy; and after
some pains I managed to worm out of him a very indefinite but useful idea
of what matters the von Papen documents covered.

What I learned was sufficient to enable me to exclude from my story any
facts implicating men who might be harmed by my disclosures. I told of
the Welland Canal plot so far as my part in it was concerned, and I told
of von Papen’s share in that and other activities. And I took care to
incorporate in my confession the promise of immunity that had been made
me tentatively.

“I have made these statements,” I wrote, “on the distinct understanding
that the statements I have made, or should make in the future, will not
be used against me; that I am not to be prosecuted for participation
in any enterprise directed against the United Kingdom or her Allies I
engaged in at the direction of Captain von Papen or other representatives
of the German Government; and that the promise made to me by Capt.
William Hall, Chief of the Intelligence Department of the Admiralty,
in the presence of Mr. Basil Thompson, former Governor of Tonga, and
Assistant Commissioner of Police, and in the presence of Superintendent
Quinn, political branch of Scotland Yard, that I am not to be extradited
or sent to any country where I am liable to punishment for political
offences, is made on behalf of His Majesty’s Government.”

It was on February 2nd that I turned in my confession and swore to the
truth of it. Affairs went better with me after that. I was sent to Lewes
Prison, and there I was content for the remainder of my stay in England.
And although I was still a prisoner I felt more free than I had felt
in many years. I was out of it all—free of the necessity to be always
watchful, always secret. And above all, I had cut myself loose from the
intriguing that I had once enjoyed, but which in the last two years I had
grown to hate more than I hated anything else on earth.

[Illustration: In the safe-deposit vault, the receipt for which is
reproduced herewith, Capt. von der Goltz deposited his Mexican Commission
and other papers which would prove his connection with the Mexican
Constitutionalist army. It will be noted that the receipt bears von der
Goltz’s signature as “B. H. Taylor,” the name under which he returned to
Europe.]

And there my own adventures end—so far as this book is concerned. I shall
not do more than touch upon my return to the United States on so far
different an errand than I had once planned. My testimony in the Grand
Jury proceedings against Captain Tauscher, von Igel and other of my
onetime fellow conspirators, is a matter of too recent record to deserve
more than passing mention. Tauscher, you will remember, was acquitted
because it was impossible to prove that he was aware of the objects
for which he had supplied explosives. Von Igel, Captain von Papen’s
secretary, was protected by diplomatic immunity. And Fritzen and Covani,
my former lieutenants, had not yet been captured.[4]

But though my intriguing was ended, Germany’s was not. It may be
interesting to consider these intrigues, in the light of what I had
learned during those two years—and what I have discovered since.




CHAPTER X.

    _The German intrigue against the United States. Von Papen,
    Boy-Ed and von Rintelen, and the work they did. How the
    German-Americans were used and how they were betrayed._


In the long record of German intrigue in the United States one fact
stands out predominantly. If you consider the tremendous ramifications
of the system that Germany has built, the extent of its organization and
the efficiency with which so gigantic a secret work was carried on, you
will realize that this system was not the work of a short period but
of many years. As a matter of fact, Germany had laid the foundation of
that structure of espionage and conspiracy many years before—even before
the time when the United States first became a Colonial Power and thus
involved herself in the tangle of world politics.

I am making no rash assertions when I state that ten years ago the course
which German agents should adopt toward the United States in the event
of a great European war, had been determined with a reasonable amount
of exactness by the General Staff, and that it was this plan that was
adapted to the conditions of the moment, and set into operation at the
outbreak of the present conflict. No element of hostility lay behind this
planning. Germany had no grievance against you; and whatever potential
causes of conflict existed between the two nations lay far in the future.

That plan, so complete in detail, so menacing in its intent, was but
part of a world plan that should assure to Germany when the time was
ripe the submission of all her enemies and the peaceful assistance and
acquiescence in her aims of whatever parts of the world should at that
time remain at peace. Germany looked far ahead on that day when she first
knew that war must come. She realized, if no other nation did, that
however strong in themselves the combatants were, the neutrals who should
command the world’s supplies, would really determine the victory.

Knowing this, Germany—which does not play the game of diplomacy with
gloves on—laid her plans accordingly.

The United States offered a peculiarly fruitful field for her endeavors.
By tradition and geography divorced from European rivalries, it was,
nevertheless, from both an industrial and agricultural standpoint,
obviously to become the most important of neutral nations. The United
State alone could feed and equip a continent; and it needed no prophet to
perceive that whichever country could appropriate to itself her resources
would unquestionably win the war, if a speedy military victory were not
forthcoming.

It was Germany’s aim, therefore, to prepare the way by which she could
secure these supplies, or, failing in that, to keep them from the enemy,
England—if England it should be. In a military way such a plan had
little chance of success. England’s command of the seas was too complete
for Germany to consider that she could establish a successful blockade
against her. It was then, I fancy, that Germany bethought herself of a
greatly potential ally in the millions of citizens of German birth or
parentage with whom the United States was filled.

One may extract a trifle of cynical amusement from what followed. Those
millions of German-Americans had never been regarded with affection in
Berlin. The vast majority of them were descendants of men who had left
their homes for political reasons; and of those who had been born in
Germany many had emigrated to escape military service, and others had
gone to seek a better opportunity than their native land provided. They
had been called renegades who had given up their true allegiance for
citizenship in a foreign country, and Bernstorff himself, according to
the evidence of U. S. Senator Phelan, had said that he regarded them as
traitors and cowards.

But Germany voicing her own spleen in private and Germany with an axe to
grind, were two different beings. And no one who observed the honeyed
beginnings of the _Deutschtum_ movement in America would have believed
that these men who in public were so assiduously and graciously flattered
were in private characterized as utter traitors to the Fatherland—and
worse.

Certainly no one believed it when, in 1900, Prince Henry of Prussia paid
his famous visit to America. No word of criticism of these “traitors” was
spoken by him; and when at banquets glasses were raised and Milwaukee
smiled across the table at Berlin, the sentimental onlooker might have
known a gush of joy at this spectacle of amity and reconciliation. And
the sentimental onlooker would never have suspected that Prince Henry
had traveled three thousand miles for any other purpose than to attend
the launching of the Kaiser’s yacht _Meteor_, which was then building in
an American yard.

But to the cynical observer, searching the records of the years
immediately following Prince Henry’s visit, a few strange facts would
have become apparent. He would have discovered that German societies,
which had been neither very numerous nor popular before, had in a
comparatively short time acquired a membership and a prominence that
were little short of remarkable. He would have noted the increasing
number of German teachers and professors who appeared on the faculties of
American schools and colleges. He would have remarked upon the growth in
popularity of the German newspapers, many of them edited by Germans who
had never become naturalized. And yet, observing these things, he might
have agreed with the vast majority of Americans, in regarding them as
entirely harmless and of significance merely as a proof of how hard love
of one’s native land dies.

He would have been mistaken had he so regarded them. The German
Government does not spend money for sentimental purposes; and in the
last ten years that Government has expended literally millions of dollars
for propaganda in the United States. It has consistently encouraged a
sentiment for the Fatherland that should be so strong that it would hold
first place in the heart of every German-American. It has circulated
pamphlets advocating the exclusive use of the German language, not merely
in the homes, but in shops and street cars and all other public places.
It has lent financial support to German organizations in America, and in
a thousand ways has aimed so to win the hearts of the German-Americans
that when the time should come the United States, by sheer force of
numbers, would be delivered, bound hand and foot, into the hands of the
German Government.

It was this object of undermining the true allegiance of the German
citizens of the United States which transformed an innocent and natural
tendency into a menace that was the more insidious because the very
people involved were, for the most part, entirely ignorant of its
true nature. Germany seized upon an attachment that was purely one of
sentiment and race and sought to make it an instrument of political
power; and she went about her work with so efficient a secrecy that she
very nearly accomplished her purpose.

By the time the Great War broke out the German propaganda in America had
assumed notable proportions. German newspapers were plentiful and had
acquired a tremendous influence over the minds of German-speaking folk.
Many of the German societies had been consolidated into one national
organization—the German-American National Alliance, with a membership of
two millions, and a president, C. J. Hexamer of Chicago, whose devotion
to the Fatherland has been so great that he has since been decorated
with the Order of the Red Eagle. And the German people of the United
States had, by a long campaign of flattery and cajolery, coupled with a
systematic glorification of German genius and institutions, been won to
attachment to the country of their origin that required only a touch to
translate it into fanaticism.

Germany had set the stage and rehearsed the chorus. There were needed
only the principals to make the drama complete. These she provided in the
persons of four men: Franz von Papen, Karl Boy-Ed, Heinrich Albert, and
later, Franz von Rintelen.

They were no ordinary men whom Germany had appointed to the leadership
of this giant underground warfare against a peaceful country. Highly
bred, possessing a wide and intensive knowledge of finance, of military
strategy and of diplomatic finesse, they were admirably equipped to win
the admiration and trust of the people of this country, at the very
moment that they were attacking them. All of them were men skilled in the
art of making friends; and so successfully did they employ this art that
their popularity for a long time contrived to shield them from suspicion.
Each of these men was assigned to the command of some particular branch
of German secret service. And each brought to his task the resources of
the scientist, the soldier and the statesman, coupled with the scruples
of the bandit.

It is impossible in this brief space to tell the full story of the
activities of these gentlemen and of their many, highly trained
assistants. Violence, as you know, played no small part in their plans.
Sedition, strikes in munitions plants, attacks upon ships carrying
supplies to the Allies, the crippling of transportation facilities,
bomb outrages—these are a few of the main elements in the campaign to
render the United States useless as a source of supply for Germany’s
enemies. But ultimately of far more importance than this was a program
of publicity that should not only present to the German-Americans the
viewpoint of their fatherland (an entirely legitimate propaganda) but
which was aimed to consolidate them into a political unit which should be
used, by peaceful means if possible—such as petitions and the like—and if
that method failed, by _absolute armed resistance_, to force the United
States Government to declare an embargo upon shipments of munitions and
foodstuffs to the Allies, and to compel it to assume a position, if
not of active alliance with Germany (a hope that was never seriously
entertained) at least one which should distinctly favor the German
Government and cause serious dissension between America and England.

There followed a two-fold campaign; on the one hand active terrorism
against private industry insofar as it was of value to the Allies,
reinforced by the most determined plots against Canada; on the other
an insincere and lying propaganda that presented the United States
Government as a pretender of a neutrality which it did not attempt to
practise—as an institution controlled by men who were unworthy of the
support of any but Anglophiles and hypocrites.

Left to itself the sympathy of German-Americans would have been directed
toward Germany; stimulated as it was by an unremitting campaign
of publicity, this sympathy became a devotion almost rabid in its
intensity. Race consciousness was aroused, and placed upon the defensive
by the attitude of the larger portion of the American press, the
German-Americans became defiant and aggressive in their apologies for the
Fatherland. Even those whose German origin was so remote that they were
ignorant of the very language of their fathers, subscribed to newspapers
and periodicals whose sole reason for existence was that they presented
the truth—as Germany saw it. If in that presentation the German press
adopted a tone that was seditious—why, there were those in Berlin who
would applaud the more heartily. And in New York Captain von Papen and
his colleagues would read and nod their heads approvingly.

At the end of the first two months of the war, and of my active service
in America, the campaign of violence was well under way. Already plans
had been made for several enterprises other than the Welland Canal plot,
which I have discussed already. Attacks had been planned against several
vulnerable points in the Canadian Pacific Railway, such as the St. Clair
Tunnel, running under the Detroit River at Point Huron, Mich.; agents
had been planted in the various munitions factories, and spies were
everywhere seeking possible points of vantage at which a blow for Germany
could be struck. A plan had even then been made to blow up the railroad
bridge at Vanceboro.

But already von Papen and his associates, including myself, knew that
Germany could never succeed in crippling Allied commerce in the United
States and in proceeding effectively against Canada until we could count
upon the implicit co-operation of the German-Americans, even though that
co-operation involved active disloyalty to the country of their adoption.

There lay the difficulty. That the bulk of the German-Americans were
loyal to their government, I knew at the time. Now, happily, that is a
matter that is beyond doubt. Among them there were, of course, many whose
zeal outran their scruples and others whose scruples were for sale. But
for the most part, although they could be cajoled into a partnership
that was not always prudent, they could not be led beyond this point
into positive defiance of the United States, however mistaken they might
believe its policies.

The rest of the story I cannot tell at first hand, for I was not directly
concerned in the events that followed. What I know I have pieced together
from my recollection of conversations with von Papen, and from what many
people in Berlin, who thought I was familiar with the affair, told me.
Who fathered the idea, I do not know. Some one conceived a scheme so
treacherous and contemptible that every other act of this war seems white
beside it. _It was planned so to discredit the German-Americans that the
hostility of their fellow-citizens would force them back into the arms
of the German Government._ These millions of American citizens of German
descent were to be given the appearance of disloyalty, in order that they
might become objects of suspicion to their fellows, and through their
resentment at this attitude the cleavage between Germans and non-Germans
in this country would be increased and perhaps culminate in armed
conflict.

On the face of it this looks like the absurd and impossible dream of
an insane person, rather than a diplomatic program. And yet, if it be
examined more closely, the plan will be seen to have a psychological
basis that, however far-fetched, is essentially sound. Given a people
already bewildered by the almost universal condemnation of a country
which they have sincerely revered; add to that serious difference in
sympathies an attitude of distrust of all German-Americans by the
other inhabitants of this country; and you have sown the seed of a
race-antagonism that if properly nurtured may easily grow into a violent
hatred. In a word, Germany had decided that if the German-Americans could
not be coaxed back into the fold they might be beaten back. She set
about her part of the task with an industry that would have commanded
admiration had it been better employed.

Glance back over the history of the past three years and consider how,
almost over night, the “hyphen” situation developed. America, shaken by a
war which had been declared to be impossible, become suddenly conscious
of the presence within her borders of a portion of her population—a
nation in numbers—largely unassimilated, retaining its own language,
and possessing characteristics which suddenly became conspicuously
distasteful. Inevitably, as I say, the cleavage in sympathies produced
distrust. But it was not until stories of plots in which German-Americans
were implicated became current that this distrust developed into an acute
suspicion. Germanophobia was rampant in those days, and to hysterical
persons it was unthinkable that any German could be exempt from the
suspicion of treason.

It was upon this foundation that the German agents erected their
structure of lies and defamation. Not content with the efforts which
the jingo press and jingo individuals were unconsciously making in
their behalf, they deliberately set on foot rumors which were intended
to increase the distrust of German-Americans. I happen to know that
during the first two years of the war, many of the stories about German
attempts upon Canada, about German-American complicity in various plots,
_emanated from the offices of Captain von Papen and his associates_. I
know also that many plots in which German-Americans were concerned had
been deliberately encouraged by von Papen and afterward as deliberately
betrayed! Time after time, enterprises with no chance of success were set
on foot with the sole purpose of having them fail—for thus Germany could
furnish to the world evidence that America was honey-combed with sedition
and treachery—evidence which Americans themselves would be the first to
accept.

It was in reality a gigantic game of bluff. Germany wished to give
to the world convincing proof that all peoples of German descent were
solidly supporting her. It was for this reason that reports of impossible
German activities were set afloat; that rumors of Germans massing in
the Maine woods, of aëroplane flights over Canada, and of all sorts
of enterprises which had no basis in fact, were disseminated. And
since many anti-German papers had been indiscreet enough to attack the
German-Americans as disloyal, the German agents used and fomented these
attacks for their own purposes.

Who could gain by such a campaign of slander and the feeling it would
produce? Certainly not the Administration, which had great need of a
united country behind it. Certainly not the American press, which was
certain to lose circulation and advertising; nor American business, which
would suffer from the loss of thousands of customers of German descent,
who would turn to the German merchant for their needs. Only two classes
could profit: the German press, which was liberally subsidized by the
German Government, and the German Government itself.

It was to the interests of the administration at Washington to keep the
country united by keeping the Germans disunited. The reverse condition
would tend to indicate that Americanism was a failure, since the country
was divided at a critical time; it would seriously hamper the Government
in its dealings with all the warring nations; and it would be of benefit
only to the German societies and German press, and through them to the
German Government. It _was_ of benefit. The German newspapers increased
their circulations and advertising revenues, in many cases by more than
one hundred per cent. German banks and insurance companies received money
that had formerly gone to American institutions and which now went to
swell the Imperial German War Loans. And the German clubs increased their
memberships and became more and more instruments of power in the work of
Germany.

There is a typical German club in New York—the _Deutscher Verein_ on
Central Park South. During the war it has been used as a sub-office of
the German General Staff. It was here that von Papen used to store the
dynamite that was needed in such enterprises as the Welland Canal plot.
It was here that conspirators used to meet for conferences which no one,
not even the other members of the club, could tell were not as innocent
as they seemed.

These German societies and other agencies were used not merely to promote
sympathy for the German cause, but also to influence public opinion in
matters of purely American interest. On January 21, 1916, Henry Weismann,
president of the Brooklyn branch of the German-American National Alliance
sent a report to headquarters in Chicago, regarding the activities of his
organization in the recent elections. In the Twenty-third Congressional
District of New York, Ellsworth J. Healy had been a candidate for
Congress. Both he and another man, John J. Fitzgerald, candidate for
Justice of the Supreme Court of New York, were regarded by German
interests as “unneutral.” They were defeated, and Weismann in commenting
upon the matter, wrote: “_The election returns prove that Deutschtum is
armed and able, when the word is given, to seat its men._”

Even in the campaign for preparedness Germany took a hand. Berlin was
appealed to in some cases as to the attitude that American citizens of
German descent should adopt toward this policy. Professor Appelmann of
the University of Vermont wrote to Dr. Paul Rohrbach, one of the advisers
of the Wilhelmstrasse, requesting his advice upon the subject. Dr.
Rohrbach replied that American _Deutschtum_ should not be in favor of
preparedness, because “_it is quite conceivable that in the event of an
American-Japanese war, Germany might adopt an attitude of very benevolent
neutrality toward Japan and so make it easier for Japan to defeat the
United States_.” And not long ago the _Herold des Glaubens_ of St. Louis,
made this statement: “When we found that the agitation for preparedness
was in the interest of the munition makers and that its aim was a war
with Germany, we certainly turned against it and we have agitated against
it for the last three months.”

But this anti-militaristic spirit was a rather sudden development on the
part of the German societies. In 1911, when a new treaty of arbitration
with Great Britain was under consideration, a group of roughs, _led and
organized by a German_, violently broke up a meeting held under the
auspices of the New York Peace Society to support that treaty. The man
who broke that meeting up was Alphonse G. Koelble. It was this same
Koelble who in 1915, when Germany’s attack upon America was most bitter,
organized a meeting of “The Friends of Peace,” in order to protest
against militarism! Strange, is it not, this inconsistency? _Or was it
that Mr. Koelble was acting under orders?_

Germany did these things not only for their political effect, but also
because she knew that she could turn the evidence of her own meddling
to account. It was for the same reason that Wolf von Igel, von Papen’s
secretary and successor, retained in his office a list of American
citizens of German descent who “could be relied on.” This list was found
by agents of the Department of Justice when von Igel’s office was raided.
And the German agents were glad it was discovered. _It gave to Americans
an additional proof of the hold that Germany had obtained over a large
group of German-Americans._

It was as late as March, 1916, that the members of the Minnesota chapter
of the German-American National Alliance received a circular, advising
them of the attitude _toward Germany_ of the various candidates for
delegate to the national conventions of the different parties, and
indicating by a star the names of those men “about whom it has been
ascertained that they are in agreement with the views and wishes of
_Deutschland_ and that if elected they will act accordingly.” I do not
believe that the men who sent that circular expected it to be widely
obeyed. But unquestionably they knew it would be made public.

I think that if the German conspirators in America had confined their
activities to this field they might ultimately have succeeded. They had
managed to seduce a sufficient number of German-Americans to cause the
entire German-American population to be regarded with suspicion. They
had contrived to discredit the pacifist and labor movements by making
public their own connection with individuals in these bodies. They had
aroused the public to such a pitch of distrust that in the Presidential
campaign of 1916 the support of the “German vote” was regarded with
distaste by both candidates. And they had helped to create so tremendous
a dissension in America that friendships of long standing were broken up,
German merchants in many communities lost all but their German customers,
and German-Americans were belabored in print with such twaddle as the
following:

“The German-Americans predominate in the grog-shops, low dives, pawn
shops and numerous artifices for money-making and corrupt practices in
politics.”

The foregoing statement, which I quote from a book, “German Conspiracies
in the United States,” written by a gentleman named Skaggs, is not
perhaps a fair sample of the attacks made upon German-Americans by the
press in general, but it is indicative of the heights to which feeling
ran in the case of a few uninformed or hysterical persons. The point is
that to a large portion of the populace the German-Americans had become
enemies and objects of abuse.

They, in turn, beset on all sides by a campaign of slander insidiously
fostered by men to whom they had given their trust, did exactly what had
been expected. They fell right into the arms of that movement which for
fourteen years had been subsidized for that very purpose. They ceased
to read American newspapers. They read German newspapers, many of which
almost openly preached disloyalty to the United States. They became
clannish and joined German societies which frequently contained German
agents. They began to boycott American business houses and dealt only
with those of German affiliations.

Germany had gained her point. She alone could gain by the disunity
of the country. It was to her advantage that the profits which had
formerly gone to American business houses should be deflected to German
corporations. _And had she rested her efforts there, she might, as I say,
have seen them produce results in the form of riots and armed dissension,
which would have effectively prevented the United States from entering
the war._

But Germany over-reached herself. Emboldened by the apparent success
of their schemes, her principal agents, von Papen, Boy-Ed and von
Rintelen (who had begun his work in January, 1915) became careless, so
far as secrecy was concerned, and so audacious in their plans that they
betrayed themselves, perhaps intentionally, as a final demonstration of
their power. The results you know. Insofar as the disclosures of their
activities tended further to implicate the German-Americans, they did
harm. But by those very disclosures the eyes of many German-Americans
were opened to the true nature of the influence to which they had
been subjected, and through that fact the worst element of the German
propaganda in America received its death blow.

To-day the United States is at war and no intelligent man now questions
the loyalty of the majority of the citizens of German blood. That in
the past their sympathies have been with Germany is unquestioned and,
from their standpoint, entirely proper. That in many cases they view the
participation of the United States in the war with regret is probable.
But that they will stand up and if need be fight as staunchly as any
other group in the country, no man may doubt.

That is the story of the darkest chapter in the history of German
intrigue. Other things have been done in this war at which a humane man
may blush. Other crimes have been committed which not even the staunchest
partisan can condone. But at least it may be said that those things were
done to enemies or to neutral people whom fortune had put in the way of
injury. The betrayal of the German-Americans was a wanton crime against
men whom every association and every tie of kinship or tradition should
have served to protect.

Germany has not yet abandoned that attack. There are still spies in the
United States, you may be sure—still intrigues are being fostered. And
there are still men who, consciously or unconsciously, are striving to
discredit the German-Americans by presenting them as unwilling to bear
their share in the burden of the nation’s war. Only a week before these
lines were written one man—George Sylvester Viereck—circulated a petition
begging that Germans should not be sent to fight their countrymen, and
an organization of German Protestant churches in America is repeating
this plea. As a German whom fortune has placed outside the battle, and
as one whose patriotism is extended toward blood rather than dynasty, I
ask Mr. Viereck and these other gentlemen if they have not forgotten that
many German-Americans have already shown their feelings by volunteering
for service in this war—and if they have not also forgotten that the two
great wars of American history were fought between men of the same blood.

Ties of blood have never prevented men from fighting for a cause which
they believed to be just. They will not in this war! And when Mr. Viereck
and his kind protest against the participation in the war of men of any
descent whatever, they imply that the American cause is _not_ just and
that it is not worthy of the support of the men they claim to represent.

Is this their intention?




CHAPTER XI.

    _More about the German intrigue against the United States.
    German aims in Latin America. Japan and Germany in Mexico. What
    happened in Cuba?_


“American intervention in Mexico would mean another Ireland, another
Poland—another sore spot in the world. Well, why not?”

Those were almost the last words spoken to me when I left Germany in
1914, upon my ill-fated mission to England. I had in my pocket at the
moment detailed memoranda of instructions which, if they could be carried
out, would insure such disturbances in Mexico that the United States
would be compelled to intervene. I had been given authority to spend
almost unlimited sums of money for the purchase of arms, for the bribery
of officials—for anything in fact that would cause trouble in Mexico.
And the words I have quoted were not spoken by an uninformed person with
a taste for cynical comment; they were uttered by Major Köhnemann,
of Abteilung III B of the German General Staff. They form a lucid and
concrete explanation of German activities in Mexico during the past eight
years.

Long before this war began German agents were at work in Mexico, stirring
up trouble in the hope of causing the United States to intervene. I
have already told how, in 1910 and 1911, Germany had encouraged Japan
and Mexico in negotiating a treaty that was to give Japan an important
foothold in Mexico. I have told how, after this treaty was well on the
way to completion, Germany saw to it that knowledge of the projected
terms was brought to the attention of the United States—thereby
indirectly causing Diaz’s abdication. That instance is not an isolated
case of Germany meddling in Mexican affairs. Rather is it symptomatic of
the traditional policy of Wilhelmstrasse in regard to America.

It may be well to examine this policy more closely than I have done. Long
ago Germany saw in South America a fertile field for exploitation, not
only in a commercial way, in which it presented excellent opportunities
to German manufacturers, but also as a possible opportunity for expansion
which had been denied her elsewhere. All of the German colonies were
in torrid climates, in which life for the white man was attended with
tremendous hardships and exploitation and colonization were consequently
impeded. Only in the Far East and in South America could she find
territories either unprotected through their own weakness, or so thinly
settled that they offered at once a temptation and an opportunity to
the nation with imperialistic ambitions. In the former quarter she was
blocked by a concert of the Powers, many of them actuated by similar
aims, but all working at such cross purposes that aggression by any one
of them was impossible. I have already alluded to the result of such
a situation in my discussion of the Anglo-Persian Agreement. In South
America there was only one formidable obstacle to German expansion—the
Monroe Doctrine.

I am stating the case with far less than its true complexity. There
were, it is true, many facts in the form of conflicting rivalries of
the Powers as well as internal conditions in South America, that would
have had a deterrent effect upon the German program. Nevertheless, it is
certain that the prime factor in keeping Germany out of South America was
the traditional policy of the United States; and, so far as the German
Government’s attitude in the matter is concerned, it is the only phase of
the problem worth considering.

Germany had no intention of securing territory by a war of conquest. Her
method was far simpler and much less assailable. She promptly instituted
a peaceful invasion of various parts of the continent; first in the
persons of merchants who captured trade but did not settle permanently in
the country; second, by means of a vast army of immigrants, who, unlike
those who a generation before had come to the United States, settled,
_but retained their German citizenship_. With this unnaturalized element
she hoped to form a nucleus in many of the important South American
countries, which, wielding a tremendous commercial power and possessing a
political influence that was considerable, although indirect, would aid
her in determining the course of South American politics so that by a
form of peaceful expansion she could eventually achieve her aims.

Was this a dream? At any rate it received the support of many of the
ablest statesmen of Germany, who duly set about the task of discrediting
the Monroe Doctrine in the eyes of the very people it was designed to
protect, so that the United States, if it ever came forcibly to defend
the Doctrine, would find itself opposed not only by Germany but by South
America as well.

Now, the easiest way to cast suspicion upon a policy is to discredit the
sponsor of it. In the case of the United States and South America this
was not at all difficult; for the southern nations already possessed a
well defined fear and a dislike of their northern neighbor that were not
by any means confined to the more ignorant portions of the population.
Fear of American aggression has been somewhat of a bugaboo in many
quarters. Recognizing this, Germany, which has always adopted the policy
of aggravating ready-made troubles for her own ends, steadily fomented
that fear by means of a quiet but well-conducted propaganda, _and also by
seeking to force the United States into taking action that would justify
that fear_.

As a means toward securing this latter end, Mexico presented itself as a
heaven-sent opportunity. Even in the days when it was, to outward eyes,
a well-ordered community, there had been men in the United States who
had expressed themselves in favor of an expansion southward which would
result in the ultimate absorption of Mexico; and although such talk had
never attracted much attention in the quarter from which it emanated,
there were those who saw to it that proposals of this sort received
an effective publicity south of the Isthmus. Given, then, a Mexico in
which discontent had become so acute that it was being regarded with
alarm by American and foreign investors, the possibility of intervention
became more immediate and the opportunity of the trouble-maker increased
proportionately.

[Illustration: The order for the deportation of von der Goltz which for
some reason was not put into effect.]

Germany’s first step in this direction, was, as you know, the
encouragement of a Japanese-Mexican alliance, the failure of which was
a vital part of her program. It was a risky undertaking, for if, by any
chance, the alliance were successfully concluded, the United States might
well hesitate to attack the combined forces of the two countries; and
Mexico, fortified by Japan, would present a bulwark against the real or
fancied danger of American expansion, that, for a time at least, would
effectually allay the fears of South America. That risk Germany took,
and insofar as she had planned to prevent the alliance scored a success.
That she failed in her principal aim was due to the anti-imperialistic
tendencies of the United States and the statesmanship of Señor
Limantour, rather than to any other cause.

Then came the Madero Administration with its mystical program of
reform—and an opposition headed by almost all of the able men in the
republic, both Mexican and foreign. Bitterly fought by the ring of
Cientificoes, who saw the easy spoils of the past slipping from their
hands; distrusted by many honest men, who sincerely believed that Mexico
was better ruled by an able despot than by an upright visionary; hampered
by the aloofness of foreign business and governments, waiting for a
success which they alone could insure, before they should approve and
support; and constantly beset with uneasiness by the incomprehensible
attitude of the Taft Administration and of its Ambassador—the fate of the
Madero Government was easily foreseen.

Before Madero had been in power for three months this opposition had
taken form as a campaign of obstruction in the Mexican Chamber of
Deputies, supported by the press, controlled almost exclusively by
the Cientificoes and by foreign capitalists; by the clergy, who had
reason to suspect the Government of anti-clerical tendencies; and by
isolated groups of opportunity seekers who saw in the Administration an
obstacle to their own political and economic aims. The Madero family
were represented as incompetent and self-seeking; and in a short time the
populace, which a month before had hailed the new government as a savior
of the country, had been persuaded that its program of economic reform
had been merely a political pretense, and accordingly added its strength
to the party of the Opposition.

Here was tinder aplenty for a conflagration of sorts. Germany applied the
torch at its most inflammable spot.

That inflammable spot happened to be a man—Pazcual Orozco. Orozco had
been one of Madero’s original supporters, and in the days of the Madero
revolution had rendered valuable services to his chief. An ex-muleteer,
uncouth and without education, he possessed considerable ability;
but his vanity and reputation were far in excess of his attainments.
Unquestionably he had expected that Madero’s success would mean a
brilliant future for himself, although it is difficult to tell in just
what direction his ambitions pointed. Madero had placed him in command
of the most important division of the Federal army, but this presumably
did not content him. At any rate, early in February, 1912, he made a
demand upon the Government for two hundred and fifty thousand pesos,
threatening that he would withdraw from the services of the Government
unless this “honorarium”—honesty would call it a bribe—were paid to him.
Madero refused his demand, but with mistaken leniency retained Orozco in
office—and on February 27, Orozco repaid this trust by turning traitor at
Chihuahua, and involving in his defection six thousand of Mexico’s best
troops as well as a quantity of supplies.

Now mark the trail of German intrigue. In Mexico City, warmly supporting
the Madero Government, but of little real power in the country, was the
German Minister, Admiral von Hintze. Under normal circumstances, his
influence would have been of great value in helping to render secure
the position of Madero; but with means of communication disrupted as
they were to a large extent, his power was inconceivably less than
that of the German consuls, all of whom were well liked and respected
by the Mexicans with whom they were in close touch. Apart from their
political office, these men represented German business interests in
Mexico, particularly in the fields of hardware and banking. In the three
northern cities of Parral, Chihuahua and Zacatecas, the German consuls
were hardware merchants. In Torreon the consul was director of the
German bank. As such it would seem that it was to their interests to work
for the preservation of a stable government in Mexico. And yet the fact
remains that when Orozco first began to show signs of discontent, these
men encouraged him with a support that was both moral and financial; and
when the general finally turned traitor, it was my old friend, Consul
Kueck, who, as President of the Chamber of Commerce of Chihuahua, voted
to support him and to recognize Orozco’s supremacy in that State!

I leave it to the reader to decide whether it was the Minister or the
consuls who really represented the German Government.

It would be idle to attempt to trace more than in the briefest way
Germany’s part in the events of the next few years. Always she followed
a policy of obstruction and deceit. During the months immediately
succeeding the Orozco outbreak, at the very moment that von Hintze was
lending his every effort to the preservation of the Madero regime,
sending to Berlin reports which over and over again reiterated his belief
that Madero could, if given a free hand, restore order in the republic,
the German consuls were openly fomenting disorder in the North.

They were particularly well equipped to make trouble, by their position
in the community and by the character and reputation of the rest of the
German population. It may be said with safety that however careless
Germany has been about the quality of the men whom she has allowed to
emigrate to other countries, her representatives throughout all of
Latin-America have been conspicuous for their commercial attainments and
for their social adaptability. This, in a large way has been responsible
for the German commercial success in Central and South America. As
bankers they have been honest and obliging in the matter of credit. As
merchants they have adapted themselves to the local conditions and to
the habits of their customers with notable success. In consequence they
have been well-liked as individuals and have been of immense value in
increasing the prestige of the German Empire. In Mexico they were the
only foreigners who were not disliked by either peon or aristocrat; and
it is significant to note that during seven years of unrest in that
country, Germans alone among peoples of European stock have remained
practically unmolested by any party.

Consider of what service this condition was in their campaign. Respected,
influential, they were in an excellent position to stimulate whatever
anti-American feeling existed in the Latin American countries. At the
same time, they were equally well situated to encourage the unrest in
Mexico that would be the surest guarantee of American intervention—and
the coalition against the United States which intervention would be
certain to provoke. They made the utmost use of their advantage, and they
did it without arousing suspicion or rebuke.

After the failure of the short-lived Orozco outbreak, events in
Mexico seemed to promise a peaceful solution of all difficulties.
Many of Madero’s opponents declared a truce, and the irreconcileables
were forced to bide their time in apparent harmlessness. In November
came the rebellion of Felix Diaz, fathered by a miscellaneous group
of conspirators who hoped to find in the nephew sufficient of the
characteristics of the great Porfirio to serve their purposes. This
venture failed also. Again Madero showed a mistaken leniency in
preserving the life of Diaz. He paid for it with his life. Out of this
uprising came the _coup d’etat_ of General Huerta—made possible by a dual
treachery—and the murder of the only man who at the time gave promise of
eventually solving the Mexican problem.

What share German agents had in that tragic affair I do not know. You may
be sure that they took advantage of any opportunity that presented itself
to encourage the conspirators in a project that gave such rich promise
of aiding them in their purposes. I pass on to the next positive step in
their campaign. That was a repetition of their old plan of inserting the
Japanese question into the general muddle.

The Japanese question in Mexico is a very real one. I know—and the
United States Government presumably knows, also—that Japan is the only
nation which has succeeded in gaining a permanent foothold in Mexico. I
know that spies and secret agents in the guise of peddlars, engineers,
fishermen, farmers, charcoal burners, merchants and even officers in
the armies of every Mexican leader have been scattered throughout the
country. The number of these latter I have heard estimated at about
eight hundred; at any rate it is considerable. There are also about ten
thousand Japanese who have no direct connection with Tokio but who are
practically all men of military age, either unmarried or without wives in
Mexico—most of them belonging to the army or navy reserve. And, like the
Germans, the Japanese never lose their connection with the Government in
their capacity as private individuals.

Through the great government-owned steamship line, the Toyo Kisen
Kaisha, the Japanese Government controls the land for a Japanese coaling
station at Manzanilla. At Acapulco a Japanese company holds a land
concession on a high hill three miles from the sea. It is difficult to
see what legitimate use a fishing company could make of this location.
It is, however, an ideal site for a wireless station. In Mexico City an
intimate friend of the Japanese Chargé d’Affaires owns a fortress-like
building in the very heart of the capital. Another Japanese holds, under
a ninety-nine year lease, an L-shaped strip of land partly surrounding
and completely commanding the water works of the capital of Oxichimilco.
The land is undeveloped. Both of these Japanese are well supplied with
money and have been living in Mexico City for several years. Neither one
has any visible means of support. And in all of the years of revolution
in Mexico no Japanese have been killed—except by Villa. He has caused
many of them to be executed, but always those that were masquerading as
Chinese. Naturally a government cannot protest under such circumstances.

These facts may or may not be significant. They serve to lend color to
the convictions of anti-Japanese agitators in the United States, and as
such they have been of value to Germany. Accordingly it was suggested to
Señor Huerta that an alliance with Japan would be an excellent protective
measure for him to take.

Huerta had two reasons for looking with favor upon this proposal. He was
very decidedly in the bad graces of Washington, and he was constantly
menaced by the presence in Mexico of Felix Diaz, to whom he had agreed
to resign the Presidency. Diaz was too popular to be shot, too strong
politically to be exiled and yet—he must be removed. Here, thought
Huerta, was an opportunity of killing two birds with one stone. He
therefore sent Diaz to Japan, ostensibly to thank the Japanese Government
for its participation in the Mexican Centennial celebration, three years
before, but in reality to begin negotiations for a treaty which should
follow the lines of the one unsuccessfully promulgated in 1911.

Señor Diaz started for Japan—but he never arrived there. Somehow the
State Department at Washington got news of the proposed treaty—how, only
the German agents know—and Señor Diaz’s course was diverted.

Meanwhile, in spite of the strained relations between Huerta and
Washington, Germany was aiding the Mexican president with money and
supplies. In the north, Consuls Kueck of Chihuahua, Sommer of Durango,
Muller of Hermosillo, and Weber of Juarez were exhibiting the same
interest in the Huertista troops that they had formerly displayed toward
Orozco. Kueck, as I happened to learn later, had financed Salvator
Mercado, the general who had so obligingly tried to have me shot; and at
the same time he was assiduously spreading reports of unrest in Mexico,
and even attempted to bribe some Germans to leave the country, upon the
plea that their lives were in danger.

When I raided the German Consulate at Chihuahua, I found striking
documentary proof of his activities in this direction. There were letters
there proving that he had paid to various Germans sums ranging as high
as fifty dollars a month, upon condition that they should remain outside
of Mexico. These letters, in many cases, showed plainly that this was
done in order to make it seem that the unrest was endangering the lives
of foreign inhabitants; in spite of which several of the recipients
complained that their absence from Mexico was causing them considerable
financial loss, and showed an evident desire to brave whatever dangers
there might be—if they could secure the permission of Consul Kueck.

During the year and more that Huerta held power, Germany followed the
same tactics. I need not remind you of the attempt to supply Huerta with
munitions after the United States had declared an embargo upon them; or
that it has been generally admitted that the real purpose of the seizure
of Vera Cruz by United States marines was to prevent the German steamer
_Ypiranga_ from delivering her cargo of arms to the Mexicans. That is but
one instance of the way in which German policy worked—a policy which, as
I have indicated, was opposed to the true interests of Mexico, and has
been solely directed against the United States. Up to the very outbreak
of the war it continued. After Villa’s breach with Carranza, emissaries
of Consul Kueck approached the former with offers of assistance.
Strangely enough he rejected them, principally because he hates the
Germans for the assistance they gave his old enemy, Orozco. Villa had,
moreover, a personal grudge against Kueck. When General Mercado was
defeated at Ojinaga, papers were found in his effects that implicated
the Consul in a conspiracy against the Constitutionalists, although at
the time Kueck professed friendship for Villa and was secretly doing all
he could to increase the friction that existed between the general and
Mercado. Villa had sworn vengeance against the double-dealer; and Kueck,
in alarm, fled into the United States.

With the outbreak of the Great War the situation changed in one important
particular. Heretofore, German activities had been part of a plan of
attack upon the prestige of the United States. Now they became necessary
as a measure of defense. Before two months had passed it became evident
to the German Government that the United States _must_ be forced into a
war with Mexico in order to prevent the shipment of munitions to Europe.

So began the last stage of the German intrigue in Mexico—an intrigue
which still continues. As a preliminary step, Germany had organized her
own citizens in that country into a well-drilled military unit—a little
matter which Captain von Papen had attended to during the spring of 1914.
One can read much between the lines of the report sent to the Imperial
Chancellor by Admiral von Hintze, commenting upon the work of Captain von
Papen in this direction. The Admiral says in part: “He showed especial
industry in organizing the Germany colony for purposes of self-defense,
and out of this shy and factious material, unwilling to undertake any
military activity, he obtained what there was to be got.”

Von Hintze significantly recommends that the captain should be decorated
with the fourth class of the Order of the Red Eagle.

As I have stated elsewhere, I left Germany in October of 1914, with a
detailed plan of campaign for the “American front,” as Dr. Albert once
put it. My final instructions were simple and explicit.

“There must be constant uprisings in Mexico,” I was told, in effect.
“Villa, Carranza, must be reached. Zapata must continue his maraudings.
It does not matter in the least how you produce these results. Merely
produce them. All consuls have been instructed to furnish you with
whatever sums you need—_and they will not ask you any questions_.”

Rather complete, was it not? I left with every intention of carrying the
instructions out—and in a little over a week was made _hors de combat_.
It was then that von Rintelen, who had already planned to come over to
the United States in order to inaugurate a vast blockade running system,
undertook to add my undertaking to his own responsibilities.

What von Rintelen did is well known, so I shall only summarize it here.
His first act was an attempted restitution of General Huerta, which he
knew was the most certain method of causing intervention. Into this
enterprise both Boy-Ed and von Papen were impressed, and the three men
set about the task of making arrangements with former Huertistas for
a new uprising to be financed by German money. They sent agents to
Barcelona to persuade the former dictator to enter into the scheme; and
finally, when the general was on his way to America, they attempted to
arrange it so that he should arrive safely in New York and ultimately in
Mexico. It was a plan remarkably well conceived and well executed. It
would have succeeded but for one thing. General Huerta was captured by
the United States authorities at the very moment that he tried to cross
from Texas into Mexico!

But the indomitable von Rintelen was not discouraged. He had but one
purpose—to make trouble—and he made it with a will. He sent money to
Villa, and then, like the philanthropist in Chesterton’s play, supported
the other side by aiding Carranza, financing Zapata and starting two
other revolutions in Mexico. Meanwhile anti-American feeling continued
to be stirred up. German papers in Mexico presented the Fatherland’s
case as eloquently as they did elsewhere, and to a far more appreciative
audience. Carranza was encouraged in his rather unfriendly attitude
toward Washington. In a word, no step was neglected which would embarrass
the Wilson Administration and make peace between the two countries more
certain or more difficult to maintain.

Need I complete the story? Is it necessary to tell how, after the recall
of von Papen and Boy-Ed and the escape of von Rintelen, Mexico continued
to be used as the catspaw of the German plotters? Every one knows the
events of the last few months; of the concentration of German reservists
in various parts of Mexico; of the bitter attacks made upon the United
States by pro-German newspapers; and of the reports, greatly exaggerating
German activities in Mexico, which have been circulated with the direct
intention of provoking still more ill-feeling between the two countries
by leading Americans to believe that Mexico is honey-combed with German
conspiracies.

[Illustration: Cover of the British White Paper, containing von der
Goltz’s confession, and referring to him as “Bridgeman Taylor.”]

These activities have not applied to Mexico alone. It is significant that
twice in February of this year the Venezuelan Government has declined to
approve of the request of President Wilson that other neutral nations
join him in breaking diplomatic relations with Germany as a protest
against submarine warfare, and that many Venezuelan papers have stated
that this refusal is due to the representations of resident Germans, who
are many and influential. These are, of course, legitimate activities,
but they are in every case attended by a threat. Revolutions are easily
begun in Latin America, and the obstinate government can always be
brought to a reasonable viewpoint by the example of recent uprisings or
revolutions, financed by Germany, in Costa Rica, Peru and Cuba. Within
a very recent time, rumors were afloat in Venezuela that Germany was
assisting General Cipriano Castro in the revolutionary movement that he
had been organizing in Porto Rico. It was reported that there were on the
Colombian frontier many disaffected persons who would gladly join Castro
if he landed in Colombia and marched on Caracas, as he did successfully
in 1890.

For several years the Telefunken Co., a German corporation, has tried to
obtain from the Venezuelan Government a concession to operate a wireless
plant, which should be of greater power than any other in South America.
When this proposal was last made, certain ministers were for accepting
it, but the majority of the Government realized the uses to which the
plant could be put and refused to grant the concession. An alternative
proposal, made by the Government, to establish a station of less
strength, was rejected by the company.

Germany has steadily sought such wireless sites throughout this region.
Several have been established in Mexico, and in 1914 it was through
a wireless station in Colombia, that the German Admiral von Spee was
enabled to keep informed of the movements of the squadron of Admiral Sir
Christopher Cradock—information which resulted in the naval battle in
Chilean waters with a loss of three British battleships. It was after
this battle that Colombia ordered the closing of all wireless stations on
its coasts.

In Cuba, too, the hand of Germany has been evident, in spite of the
disclaimers which have been made by both parties in the recent
rebellion. That rebellion grew out of the contested election in November,
in which both President Menocal and the Liberal candidate, Alfredo
Zayas, claimed a victory. It is strange if this is the real cause of the
uprising, that hostilities did not begin until February 9, when General
Gomez, himself an ex-president, began a revolt in the eastern portion
of the island. The date is important; it was barely a week before new
elections were to be held in two disputed provinces and _only six days
after the United States had severed diplomatic relations with the German
Government, and but four days after President Menocal’s Government had
declared its intention of following the action of the United States_.

A little study of the personnel and developments of the rebellion form
convincing evidence as to its true backing. The Liberal Party is strongly
supported by the Spanish element of the population, who are almost
unanimously pro-German in their sympathies. All over the island, both
Germans and Spaniards have been arrested for complicity in the uprising.
Nor have the clergy escaped. Literally, dozens of bishops have been
jailed in Havana, upon the same charges.

It is also a notorious fact that the Mexicans have supported the
Liberals, and that the staffs of the Liberal newspapers are almost
exclusively composed of Mexican journalists. These newspapers were
suppressed at the beginning of the revolution.

But far more significant are the developments in the actual fighting.

Most of the action has taken place in the eastern provinces of Camaguey,
Oriente and Santa Clara—in which the most fertile fields of sugar cane
are situated. The damage to the cane fields has been estimated at
5,000,000 tons and is, _from a military standpoint, unnecessary_.

Col. Rigoberto Fernandez one of the revolutionary leaders, stated
that the rebels were plentifully supplied with hand-grenades and
artillery—although the reports prove that they had none. Was this an
empty boast—or may there be a connection between Fernandez’s statement
and the capture by the British of three German ships, which were found
off the Azores, laden with mines and arms?

I was in Havana in the latter part of March—upon a private errand,
although the Cuban papers persisted in imputing sinister designs to me.
Naturally, the Germans were not inclined to tell all their secrets, but
my Mexican acquaintances, all of whom were well informed regarding Cuban
affairs, gave me considerable information. Among other Mexicans I met
General Joaquin Maas, the former general of the Federal forces under
Huerta. The general has since made peace with Carranza and was at this
time acting as the latter’s go-between in negotiations with Germany. When
I last saw Maas, it was after the battle of El Paredo. He was about to
blow out his brains, but one of his lieutenants elegantly informed him
that he was a fool and dissuaded him from suicide. Maas received me with
the courtesy due a former opponent and was not averse to telling me much
about the situation. I also had ample occasion to speak with Spaniards,
whose sympathies were decidedly pro-German. Little by little I was
enabled to acquire a rather complete idea—not of the issues underlying
the Cuban revolution—but who had brought matters to a head. The answer
may be found in one word—Germany. German agents—notably one Dr. Hawe ben
Hawas, who recently took a mysterious botanizing expedition throughout
that part of Cuba, which later became the scene of revolutionary
activities, and who has thrice been arrested as a German spy—saw in
the political unrest of the country another opportunity to create a
diversion in favor of Germany. Cuba at peace was a valuable economic ally
of the United States. Cuba in rebellion was a source of annoyance to this
country, since it meant intervention, the political value of which was
unfavorable to the United States, and a serious loss in sugar, which is
one of the most important ingredients in the manufacture of several high
explosives.

Hence the burning of millions of tons of sugar cane. Hence the rebel
seizure of Santiago de Cuba. Hence the large number of negroes who joined
the rebel army, and whose labor is indispensable in the production of
sugar.

The ironic part of it all is that Germany had nothing to gain by a change
of government in Cuba. Any Cuban government must have a sympathetic
attitude toward the United States. What Germany wanted was a disruption
of the orderly life of the country—and she wanted it to continue for as
long a time as possible.

At the present writing the Cuban rebellion is ended. General Gomez and
his army have been captured, President Menocal is firmly seated in power
again, and the rebels hold only a few unimportant points. But much damage
has been done in the lessening of the sugar supply—and the rebellion has
also served its purpose as an illustration of Germany’s ability to make
trouble.

Germany has played a consistent game throughout. She has sought to use
all the existing weaknesses of the world for her own purposes—all the
rivalries, all the fears, all the antipathies, she has utilized as fuel
for her own fire. And yet, although she has played the game with the
utmost foresight, with a skill that is admirable in spite of its perverse
uses, and with an unfailing assurance of success—she has come to the
fourth year of the Great War with the fact of failure staring her in the
face.

But she has not given up. You may be sure that she has not given up.




CHAPTER XII.

    _The last stand of German intrigue. Germany’s spy system in
    America. What is coming?_


As I write these last few pages three clippings from recent newspapers
lie before me on my desk. One of them tells of the new era of good
feeling that exists between the governments of Mexico and the United
States, and speaks of the alliance of Latin-American republics against
German autocracy.

Another tells how the first contingent of American troops have landed in
France, after a successful battle with a submarine fleet. And a third
speaks of the victorious advance of the troops of Democratic Russia,
after the world had begun to believe that Russia had forgotten the war in
her new freedom.

I read them over again and I think that each one of these clippings, if
true, writes “failure” once again upon the book of German diplomacy.

I remember a day not so very many months ago, when a man with whom I had
some business in—for me—less quiet days, came to see me.

“B. E. is in town,” he said quietly. “He says he must see you. Can you
meet him at the —— Restaurant to-night?”

Boy-Ed! I was not surprised that he should be in this country, for I knew
the man’s audacity. But what could he want of me? Well, it would do no
harm to meet him, I thought, and, anyway, my curiosity was aroused.

I nodded.

“I’ll be there,” I said. “At what hour?”

“Six-thirty,” my friend replied. “It’s only for a minute. He is leaving
to-night.”

That evening for the first time in two years I saw the man who had done
his share in the undermining of America. I did not ask him what his
presence in this country meant, and needless to say, he did not inform me.

Our business was of a different character. I had just arranged to write
a series of newspaper articles exposing the operations of the Kaiser’s
secret service and Boy-Ed tried to induce me to suppress them.

“I cannot do it,” I told him.

But the captain showed a remarkable knowledge of my private affairs.

“Under your contract,” he said, “the articles cannot be published until
you have endorsed them. As you have not yet affixed your signature to
them, you can suppress them by merely withholding your endorsement.”

This I declined to do and our conversation ended.

Shortly afterward, Boy-Ed returned to Germany on the U-53. He did not
attempt to see me again, but three times within the following weeks,
attempts were made upon my life. Later, pressure was brought to bear
from sources close to the German Embassy, but they failed to secure the
suppression of the articles.

But my curiosity was aroused as to the meaning of Boy-Ed’s presence here
and I set to work to discover the purpose of it. This was not difficult,
for although I have ceased to be a secret agent, I am still in touch with
many who formerly gave me information, and I know ways of discovering
many things I wish to learn.

Soon I had the full story of Boy-Ed’s latest activities in this country.

He had, I learned, gone first to Mexico in an attempt to pave the way for
that last essay at a Mexican-Japanese alliance, which the discovery of
the famous Zimmermann note later made public. Whether he had succeeded
or no, I did not discover at the time. But what was more important, I did
learn that while he was in Mexico, Boy-Ed had selected and established
several submarine bases for Germany! His plans had also carried him to
San Francisco, to which he had gone disguised only by a mustache. There
he had identified several men who were needed by the counsel of the
defense of the German Consul Bopp, who had been arrested on a charge of
conspiracy and for fomenting sedition within the United States.

From the Pacific Coast Boy-Ed had gone to Kansas City and had bought off
a witness who had intended to testify for the United States in the trial
of certain German agents. Thence, after a private errand of his own, he
had made his way to New York, _en route_ to Newport and Germany.

It may be well here to comment upon one feature of the Zimmermann note
which has generally escaped attention. It was through no blunder of
the German Government that that document came into possession of the
United States, as I happen to know. I have pointed out before that
diplomatic negotiations are carried through in the following manner. The
preliminary negotiations are conducted by men of unofficial standing
and it is not until the attitude of the various governments involved is
thoroughly understood by each of them that final negotiations are drawn
up. Now, although no negotiations had taken place between Germany, Japan
and Mexico, the form of the Zimmermann note would seem to indicate that
there was a thorough understanding between these countries. They were
drawn up in this form with a purpose. Germany wished the United States to
conclude that Mexico and Japan were hostile to her; Germany hoped that
this country would be outwardly silent about the Zimmermann note but
would take some diplomatic action against Mexico and Japan which would
inevitably draw these two countries into an anti-American alliance.

Did President Wilson perceive this thoroughly Teutonic plot? I cannot
say; but at any rate upon February 28, he astounded America by revealing
once again Germany’s evil intentions toward the United States, and by
so doing not only defeated the German Government’s particular plan but
effectively cemented public opinion in this country, bringing it to
a unanimous support of the government in the crisis which was slowly
driving it toward war.

That marked the last stand of German intrigue, as it was conducted before
the war. Now there is a new danger—a danger whose concrete illustration
lies before me in the account of that first engagement between United
States warships and German submarines.

The people of the United States, just entered into active participation
in the war, are faced with a new peril—the betrayal of military and naval
secrets to representatives of the German Government working in this
country. Not only was it known to Germany that American troops had been
sent to France, but the very course that the transports were to take had
been communicated to Berlin. It is probable that other news of equal
value has been or is being sent to Germany at the present time; and the
United States is confronted with the possibility of submarine attacks
upon its troop ships, as well as other dangers which, if not properly
combated, may result in serious losses and greatly hamper it in its
conduct of the war.

What exactly is this spy peril which this country now faces and which
constitutes a far greater, because less easily combated danger than
actual warfare?

How can it be got rid of?

These are the questions which the American people and the American
Government are asking themselves and must ask themselves if they are to
bear an effective share in the war in which they are now engaged.

Because of my former connection with the German Government and my work as
a secret agent both in Europe and America, in the former of which I was
brought into intimate contact with the workings of the secret service in
other countries, I am prepared to give a reliable account of the general
structure and workings of the German spy system in the United States as
it is to-day.

It is important to remember that the secret diplomatic service, as it was
conducted in this country before the war, and with which I was connected,
is entirely different both in its personnel and methods with the spy
system which is in operation to-day. A little further on I shall point
out why this is so and why it must be so.

Before the entry of the United States into the war, the principal
activities of the German Government’s agents were confined to the
fomenting of strikes in munitions plants and other war activities, the
organizing of plots to blow up ships, canals, or bridges—anything
which would hamper the transportation of supplies to the Allies—and the
inciting of sedition by stirring up trouble between German-Americans and
Americans of other descent. All of these acts were committed in order to
prevent you from aiding in any way the enemies of Germany; and also, by
creating disorder in this country in peace times to furnish you with an
object lesson of what could be done in war times.

These things were planned, overseen and executed by Germans and by other
enemies of the Allies, under the leadership of men like von Papen, who
were accredited agents of the German Government and who were protected by
diplomatic immunity.

Now that war has come an entirely new task is before the German
Government and an entirely new set of people are needed to do it. Wartime
spying is absolutely different from the work which was done before the
war, and the two have no connection with each other—except as the work
done before the war has prepared the way for the work which is being done
now.

And whereas the work done before the war was conducted by Germans, the
present work, for very obvious reasons, cannot be done by any one who is
a German or who is likely to be suspected of German affiliations.

I venture to say that not one per cent. of the persons who are engaged in
spying for the German Government at the present time are either of German
birth or descent.

I say this, not because I know how the German secret service is being
conducted in this country, but because I know how it has been conducted
in other countries.

Let me explain. It is obvious that such activities as the inciting to
strikes, and the conspiring which were done in the last three years
could be safely conducted by Germans, because the two countries were at
peace. The moment that war was declared, every German became an object
of suspicion, and his usefulness in spying—that is, the obtaining of
military, naval, political and diplomatic secrets—was ended immediately.
For that reason Germany and every other government which has spies in
the enemy country make a practice during war of employing practically no
known citizens of its own country.

At the present time more than ninety per cent. of the German spies in
England are Englishmen. The rest are Russians, Dutchmen, Roumanians—what
you will—anything but Germans.

One of the former heads of the French secret service in this country was
a man who called himself Guillaume. His real name is Wilhelm and he was
born in Berlin!

For that reason to arrest such men as Carl Heynen or Professor Hanneck is
merely a precautionary measure. Whatever connection these men may have
had with the German Government formerly, their work is now done, and
their detention does not hinder the workings of the real spy system one
iota.


HOW THE SPY SYSTEM WORKS.

It is difficult to distinguish between the work done in neutral countries
by the secret diplomatic agent—the man who is engaged in fomenting
disorders, such as I have described—and the spy, who is seeking military
information which may be of future use. The two work together in that the
secret agent reports to Berlin the names of inhabitants of the country
concerned, who may be of use in securing information of military or naval
value. It is well to remember, however, that the real spy always works
alone. His connection with the government is known only to a very few
officials, and is rarely or never suspected by the people who assist him
in securing information. Here permit me to make a distinction between
two classes of spies: the agents or directors of espionage, who know
what they are doing; and the others, the small fry, who secure bits of
information here and there and pass it on to their employers, the agents,
often without realizing the real purpose of their actions.

In the building of the spy system in America, Germans and
German-Americans have been used. Business houses, such as banks and
insurance companies, which have unusual opportunities of obtaining
information about their clients—most of whom, in the case of German
institutions in this country, are of German birth or descent—have been of
service in bringing the directors of spy work into touch with people who
will do the actual spying.

The German secret service makes a point of having in its possession lists
of people who are in a position to find out facts of greater or less
importance about government officials. Housemaids, small tradesmen, and
the like, can be of use in the compiling of data about men of importance,
so that their personal habits, their financial status, their business
and social relationships become a matter of record for future use. These
facts are secured, usually by a little “jollying” rather than the payment
of money, by the local agent—a person sometimes planted in garrison
towns, state capitals, etc.—who is paid a comparatively small monthly sum
for such work. This information is passed to a director of spies, who
thereby discovers men who are in a position to supply him with valuable
data and who determine whether or not they can be reached.

Now, just how is this “reaching” done? Mainly, I think it safe to say,
by blackmail and intimidation. If from this accumulated gossip about
his intended victim—who may be an army or naval officer, a manufacturer
of military supplies, or a government clerk—the spy learns of some
indiscretion committed by the man or his wife, he uses it as a club in
obtaining information that he desires. Or he may hear that a man is in
financial straits. He will make a point of seeing that his victim is
helped, and then will make use of the latter’s friendship to worm facts
out of him. In this way, sometimes without the suspicion of the victim
being aroused, little bits of information are secured, which may be of
no importance in themselves, but are of immense value when considered in
conjunction with facts acquired elsewhere.

Ultimately the victim will balk or become suspicious. Then he is offered
the alternative of continuing to supply information or of being exposed
for his previous activities. Generally he accepts the lesser evil.

In this manner the spy system is built up even in peace times. The
tremendous sums of money that are spent in this manner amount to
millions. The quantity of information secured is on the other hand,
inconceivably small for the most part. But in the mass of useless and
superfluous facts that are supplied to the spies and through them to the
government, are to be found a few that are worth the cost of the system.
By the time war breaks out, if it does, the German Government has in its
possession innumerable facts about the equipment of the army and navy of
its enemy—and more important still, it has in its power men, sometimes
high in the confidence of the enemy government, who can be forced into
giving additional information when needed.

Now, the moment that war breaks out, what happens? The German Government
has distributed throughout the country thousands of men and women
who have legitimate business there; it has its hands on men who are
not spies, but who will betray secrets for a price either in money or
security; it is acquainted with the strength and weakness of fortresses,
various units of the service, the exact armament of every ship in the
navy, the resources of munition factories—in a word almost all of the
essential details about that country’s fighting and economic strength. It
also knows what portion of the populace are inclined to be disaffected.
And it is thoroughly familiar with the strategical points of that
country, so that in case of invasion it may strike hard and effectively.

What is must learn now is:

First, what are the present military and naval activities of the enemy.

Second, what are they planning to do.

Finally, the German Government must learn the how, why, when and where of
each of these things.

That, with the machinery at its command, is not so difficult as it would
seem.

Here is where the value of the minor bits of information comes in. A
trainman tells, for instance, that he has seen a trainload of soldiers
that day, upon such and such a line. A similar report comes in from
elsewhere. Meantime another agent has reported that a certain packing
house has shipped to the government so many tons of beef; while still
another announces the delivery at a particular point of a totally
different kind of supplies. Do you not see how all these facts, taken
together, and coupled with an accurate knowledge of transportation
conditions and of the geographical structure of the country would
constitute an important indication of an enemy’s plans, even failing the
possession of any absolute secrets? Do you not suppose that weeks before
you were aware that any United States soldiers had sailed for France, the
Germans might have known of all the preparations that were being made
and could deduce accurately the number of troops that were sailing, and
many facts of importance about their equipment. There is no need for the
betrayal of secrets for this kind of information to become known. It is a
mere matter of detective work.

But mark one feature of it. These facts are communicated by different
spies—not to a central clearing house of information in this country,
as has been surmised, but to various points outside the country for
transmission to the Great General Staff. They are duplicated endlessly
by different agents. They are sent to many different people for
transmission. _And even if half of the reports were lost, or half of the
spies were discovered, there would still be a sufficient number left to
carry on their work successfully._

Germany does not depend upon one spy alone for even the smallest item.
Always the work is duplicated. Always the same information is being
secured by several men, not one of whom knows any of the others; and
always that information is transmitted to Berlin through so many diverse
channels that it is impossible for the most vigilant secret service in
the world to prevent a goodly part of it from reaching its destination.

How that information is transmitted I shall tell in a moment. First, I
wish to explain how more important facts are secured—the secret plans of
the government, such, for instance, as the course which had been decided
upon for the squadron which carried the first American troops to France.

It is obvious that such facts as these could not have been deduced from
a mass of miscellaneous reports. That secret must have been learned in
its entirety. Exactly how it was discovered I do not pretend to know
nor shall I offer any theories. But here, in a situation of this sort,
unquestionably, is where the real spy—the “master spy,” if you wish to
call him so—steps in.

Now, it is impossible, in spite of the utmost vigilance, to keep an
important document from the knowledge of all but one or two people.
No matter how secret, it is almost certain to pass through the hands
of a number of officials and possibly several clerks. And with every
additional person who knows of it, the risk of discovery or betrayal is
correspondingly increased. If in code, it may be copied or memorized by a
spy who is in a position to get hold of it, or by a person who is in the
power of that spy! Once in Berlin, it can be deciphered. For the General
Staff and the Admiralty have their experts in these matters who are very
rarely defeated.

You may be sure that Germany has made her utmost efforts to put her spies
into high places in this country, just as she has tried to do elsewhere.
You may be sure, also, that she has neglected no opportunity to gain
control over any official or any naval or army officer—however important
or unimportant—whom the agents could influence. That has always been her
method; nor is it difficult to see why it frequently succeeds.

Imagine the situation of a man who in time of peace had supplied, either
innocently or otherwise, a foreign agent with information which possessed
a considerable value. It is probable that he would revolt at a suggestion
that he do it in time of war—but with his neck once in the German noose,
with the alternative of additional compliance or exposure facing him,
it is not hard to see how some men would become conscious traitors and
others would be driven to suicide.

By a system of blackmail and intimidation the Germans have attempted to
force into their ranks many people from whom they extort information that
would now be regarded as traitorous, although formerly it might have been
given out in all innocence.

Undoubtedly it was for purposes of intimidation that von Papen carried
with him to England papers incriminating Germans and German-Americans
who had been associated with him in one way or another. And why did von
Rintelen return to this country and aid this government in exposing
the German affiliations of people who had no German blood in them? The
obvious answer is that those people had balked at aiding him in some
scheme he had proposed. Therefore he made examples of them, with the
double purpose of demonstrating to the United States the extent of German
intrigue and of filling other implicated people with fear of the exposure
that would come to them if they were not more compliant.

Once in possession of secret information, the spy is faced with the
necessity of transmitting it to Berlin. Here again, the spy who is a
German would meet with considerable difficulty. He may mail letters if
no mail censorship has been instituted; but these are liable to seizure
and are not so useful in the transmission of war secrets as they were in
informing his government before the war of more or less standard facts
about the strength of fortifications and the like. He may use private
messengers—as do all spies—but the delay in this method is a severe
handicap.

In sending news of the movements of troops, speed is the prime essential.
Consequently he must communicate either by wireless or by cable. How does
he do it?

There are innumerable ways. There may be in the confidential employ
of many business houses which do a large cable business with neutral
countries men who are either agents or dupes of the German Government.
These men may send cables which seem absolutely innocent business
messages, but which if properly read impart facts of military value to
the recipient in Holland, say, or in Spain or South America. It is not a
difficult matter to use business codes, giving to the terms an entirely
different meaning from the one assigned in the code-book. Personal
messages are also used in this way, as is well known. As to the wireless,
although all stations are under rigid supervision, what is to prevent the
Germans from establishing a wireless station in the Kentucky Mountains,
for instance, and for a time operating it successfully?

But in spite of all cable censorship, the spy can smuggle information
into Mexico, where it can be cabled or wirelessed on to Berlin, either
directly or indirectly by way of one of the neutral countries. Even in
spite of the most rigid censorship of mails and telegrams this sort of
smuggling can be accomplished.

When I was in the Constitutional Army in Mexico, I used to receive
revolver ammunition from an old German who carried it over the border _in
his wooden leg_. Could not this method be applied to dispatches?

There are numerous authenticated cases of spies who have sent messages
concealed in sausages or other articles of food. Moreover, the current
of the Rio Grande at certain places runs in such a manner that a log or
a bucket dropped in on the American side will drift to the Mexican shore
and arrive at a point which can be determined with almost mathematical
certainty.

I mention those instances merely to show how little of real value the
censorship of cables and mails can accomplish. The question arises: What
can be done? I shall try to indicate the answer.


HOW TO GET RID OF THE SPY SYSTEM.

I say frankly that I think it absolutely impossible to eradicate spies
from any country. Certainly it cannot be done in a week or a year, or
even in many years. It is more than probable that the German spy systems
in France and England are more complete to-day than they were at the
beginning of the war. Three years ago the spies in those countries were
made up of both experienced and inexperienced men. Now the bunglers have
been weeded out, and only those who are expert in defying detection
remain. But these are the only men who were ever of real use to Germany;
and fortified as they are by three years of unsuspected work in these
countries, they are enabled to secure information of infinitely more
worth than they formerly were. What is the situation in America?

I have shown you the structure of that system. Let me repeat again that
Germany has installed in this country thousands of men, whose nationality
and habits are such as to protect them from suspicion, who work silently
and alone, because they know that their very lives depend upon their
silence, and who are in communication with no central spy organization,
for the very simple reason that no such organization exists. There is no
clearing house for spy information in this country. There are no “master
spies.”

Do you think that the German Government would risk the success of a work
so important as this, by organizing a system which the arrest of any one
man or group of men would betray? The idea of centralization in this
work is popular at present. In theory it is a good one. In practise it
is impossible. By the very nature of the spy’s trade, he must run alone,
and not only be unsuspected of any connection with Germany now, but be
believed never to have had such a connection. If the secret service
were a chain, the loss of one link would break it. With a system of
independent units, endlessly overlapping, eternally duplicating each
other’s work, they continue their practices even though half of their
number are caught.

Now with these men, protected as they are by the fact that not even their
fellows know them, with their wits sharpened by three years of silent
warfare against the agents of other governments and your own neutrality
squad, the task of ferreting them out is an utterly impossible one. You
cannot prevent spies from securing information.

You cannot prevent the transmission of that information to Berlin,
without instituting, not a censorship, but a complete suppression of all
communications of any sort.

But you can do much to counteract their methods by doing two things:

I. Delaying all mails and cables, other than actual government messages.

II. Instituting a system of counter espionage, which shall have for
its object the detection _but not the arrest_ of enemy spies; and the
dissemination of misleading information.

The war work of the spy depends for success upon the speed with which he
can communicate new facts to Berlin. If all his messages are delayed, his
effectiveness is severely crippled.

If in addition to that, all persons sending suspicious messages anywhere
are carefully shadowed; if their associations are looked up, it may be
possible to determine from whom they are getting information, and by
seeing that incorrect reports are given them, render them of negligible
value to their employers.

Public arrests of suspected men are worthless. Such disclosures only
serve to put the real spies on their guard. But if the spies are allowed
to work in fancied security, it will be possible to find out just what
they know and the government can change its plans at the last moment and
so nullify their efforts.

Eternal vigilance, here as elsewhere, is the price of security. Germany
has regarded the work of her spies as of almost as much importance as
the force in the field. She has spent millions of dollars in building up
a system in this country, whose ramifications extend to all points of
your national life. And since upon this system rests all of her hopes of
rendering worthless your participation in the war, she will not lightly
let it fail.

I toss aside my clippings and sit looking out into the New York street
which shows such little sign of war as yet. Defeat! That is the end
of this silent warfare, this secret underground attack that has in it
nothing of humanity or honor. I think of Germany, a country of quiet,
peaceful folk as I once knew it, bearing no malice, going cheerfully
about their work, seeking their destiny with a will that has nothing in
it of conquest. And I think of Germany embattled, ruled by a group of
iron men who see only their own ambitions as a goal—who have brought upon
the country and the world this three-year tyranny of hate.

What will be the end? Will the war go on, eating up the lives and honor
of men with its monstrous appetite? Or will there be peace—a peace that
will bring nothing of revenge or oppression; that will carry with it
only a desire for justice to all the peoples of the earth—that will kill
forever this desire for conquest which now and in the past has borne only
sorrow and bloodshed as its fruit? Will the peace bring forgetfulness of
the past, in so far as men _can_ forget?

That would be worth fighting for.


THE END.




FOOTNOTES


[1] You will find an interesting account of the effect of this treaty
upon Persia in William Morgan Shuster’s valuable book, “The Strangling of
Persia.”

[2] Mr. Edward I. Bell, in his “The Political Shame of Mexico.”

[3] It is interesting to remember that Captain von Papen had in the
earlier part of the year, while he was still in Mexico, conducted an
investigation into the types of explosives used in Mexico for similar
enterprises. This investigation had been undertaken at the request of
the German Ministry of War. Letters regarding this matter were found in
Captain von Papen’s effects by the British authorities, and are printed
in the British White Papers, Miscellaneous No. 6 (1916).

[4] Fritzen, who was captured in Hartwood, Cal., on March 9, 1917, was
arraigned in New York City on March 16, and after pleading not guilty,
later reversed his plea. He is at present serving a term of eighteen
months in a Federal prison.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75931 ***
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Shakespeare's Sonnets, by William Shakespeare

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Shakespeare's Sonnets

Author: William Shakespeare

Posting Date: April 7, 2014 [EBook #1041]
Release Date: September, 1997
Last Updated: March 10, 2010

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHAKESPEARE'S SONNETS ***




Produced by Joseph S. Miller and Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University Library. HTML version by Al Haines.










THE SONNETS

by William Shakespeare




  I

  From fairest creatures we desire increase,
  That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
  But as the riper should by time decease,
  His tender heir might bear his memory:
  But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
  Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,
  Making a famine where abundance lies,
  Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
  Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament,
  And only herald to the gaudy spring,
  Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
  And tender churl mak'st waste in niggarding:
    Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
    To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.

  II

  When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
  And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
  Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now,
  Will be a tatter'd weed of small worth held:
  Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
  Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
  To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes,
  Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
  How much more praise deserv'd thy beauty's use,
  If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
  Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,'
  Proving his beauty by succession thine!
    This were to be new made when thou art old,
    And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.

  III

  Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest
  Now is the time that face should form another;
  Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
  Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
  For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb
  Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
  Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
  Of his self-love to stop posterity?
  Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee
  Calls back the lovely April of her prime;
  So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
  Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
    But if thou live, remember'd not to be,
    Die single and thine image dies with thee.

  IV

  Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
  Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy?
  Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend,
  And being frank she lends to those are free:
  Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
  The bounteous largess given thee to give?
  Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
  So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?
  For having traffic with thy self alone,
  Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive:
  Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
  What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
    Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
    Which, used, lives th' executor to be.

  V

  Those hours, that with gentle work did frame
  The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
  Will play the tyrants to the very same
  And that unfair which fairly doth excel;
  For never-resting time leads summer on
  To hideous winter, and confounds him there;
  Sap checked with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone,
  Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where:
  Then were not summer's distillation left,
  A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
  Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
  Nor it, nor no remembrance what it was:
    But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet,
    Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.


  VI

  Then let not winter's ragged hand deface,
  In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd:
  Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
  With beauty's treasure ere it be self-kill'd.
  That use is not forbidden usury,
  Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
  That's for thy self to breed another thee,
  Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
  Ten times thy self were happier than thou art,
  If ten of thine ten times refigur'd thee:
  Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
  Leaving thee living in posterity?
    Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
    To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.

  VII

  Lo! in the orient when the gracious light
  Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
  Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
  Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
  And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill,
  Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
  Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
  Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
  But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
  Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day,
  The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are
  From his low tract, and look another way:
    So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon:
    Unlook'd, on diest unless thou get a son.

  VIII

  Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
  Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
  Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
  Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
  If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
  By unions married, do offend thine ear,
  They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
  In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.
  Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
  Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
  Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
  Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
    Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
    Sings this to thee: 'Thou single wilt prove none.'

  IX

  Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye,
  That thou consum'st thy self in single life?
  Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
  The world will wail thee like a makeless wife;
  The world will be thy widow and still weep
  That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
  When every private widow well may keep
  By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind:
  Look! what an unthrift in the world doth spend
  Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
  But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
  And kept unused the user so destroys it.
    No love toward others in that bosom sits
    That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.

  X

  For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any,
  Who for thy self art so unprovident.
  Grant, if thou wilt, thou art belov'd of many,
  But that thou none lov'st is most evident:
  For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate,
  That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire,
  Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
  Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
  O! change thy thought, that I may change my mind:
  Shall hate be fairer lodg'd than gentle love?
  Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
  Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
    Make thee another self for love of me,
    That beauty still may live in thine or thee.

  XI

  As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st,
  In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
  And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st,
  Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest,
  Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase;
  Without this folly, age, and cold decay:
  If all were minded so, the times should cease
  And threescore year would make the world away.
  Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
  Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
  Look, whom she best endow'd, she gave thee more;
  Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
    She carv'd thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
    Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.

  XII

  When I do count the clock that tells the time,
  And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
  When I behold the violet past prime,
  And sable curls, all silvered o'er with white;
  When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
  Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
  And summer's green all girded up in sheaves,
  Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,
  Then of thy beauty do I question make,
  That thou among the wastes of time must go,
  Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
  And die as fast as they see others grow;
    And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
    Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.

  XIII

  O! that you were your self; but, love you are
  No longer yours, than you your self here live:
  Against this coming end you should prepare,
  And your sweet semblance to some other give:
  So should that beauty which you hold in lease
  Find no determination; then you were
  Yourself again, after yourself's decease,
  When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
  Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
  Which husbandry in honour might uphold,
  Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
  And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
    O! none but unthrifts. Dear my love, you know,
    You had a father: let your son say so.

  XIV

  Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck;
  And yet methinks I have astronomy,
  But not to tell of good or evil luck,
  Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
  Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
  Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
  Or say with princes if it shall go well
  By oft predict that I in heaven find:
  But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
  And constant stars in them I read such art
  As 'Truth and beauty shall together thrive,
  If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert';
    Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
    'Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.'

  XV

  When I consider every thing that grows
  Holds in perfection but a little moment,
  That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
  Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
  When I perceive that men as plants increase,
  Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky,
  Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
  And wear their brave state out of memory;
  Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
  Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
  Where wasteful Time debateth with decay
  To change your day of youth to sullied night,
    And all in war with Time for love of you,
    As he takes from you, I engraft you new.

  XVI

  But wherefore do not you a mightier way
  Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?
  And fortify your self in your decay
  With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
  Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
  And many maiden gardens, yet unset,
  With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
  Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
  So should the lines of life that life repair,
  Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen,
  Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
  Can make you live your self in eyes of men.
    To give away yourself, keeps yourself still,
    And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.

  XVII

  Who will believe my verse in time to come,
  If it were fill'd with your most high deserts?
  Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
  Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts.
  If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
  And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
  The age to come would say 'This poet lies;
  Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.'
  So should my papers, yellow'd with their age,
  Be scorn'd, like old men of less truth than tongue,
  And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage
  And stretched metre of an antique song:
    But were some child of yours alive that time,
    You should live twice,--in it, and in my rhyme.

  XVIII

  Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
  Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
  Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
  And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
  Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
  And often is his gold complexion dimm'd,
  And every fair from fair sometime declines,
  By chance, or nature's changing course untrimm'd:
  But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
  Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
  Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
  When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
    So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
    So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.

  XIX

  Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
  And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
  Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
  And burn the long-liv'd phoenix, in her blood;
  Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
  And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
  To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
  But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
  O! carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
  Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;
  Him in thy course untainted do allow
  For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
    Yet, do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong,
    My love shall in my verse ever live young.

  XX

  A woman's face with nature's own hand painted,
  Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion;
  A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
  With shifting change, as is false women's fashion:
  An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
  Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
  A man in hue all 'hues' in his controlling,
  Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
  And for a woman wert thou first created;
  Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,
  And by addition me of thee defeated,
  By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
    But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure,
    Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.

  XXI

  So is it not with me as with that Muse,
  Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse,
  Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
  And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
  Making a couplement of proud compare.
  With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
  With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare,
  That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
  O! let me, true in love, but truly write,
  And then believe me, my love is as fair
  As any mother's child, though not so bright
  As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air:
    Let them say more that like of hearsay well;
    I will not praise that purpose not to sell.

  XXII

  My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
  So long as youth and thou are of one date;
  But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
  Then look I death my days should expiate.
  For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
  Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
  Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me:
  How can I then be elder than thou art?
  O! therefore love, be of thyself so wary
  As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
  Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
  As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
    Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
    Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.

  XXIII

  As an unperfect actor on the stage,
  Who with his fear is put beside his part,
  Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
  Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart;
  So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
  The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
  And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
  O'ercharg'd with burthen of mine own love's might.
  O! let my looks be then the eloquence
  And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
  Who plead for love, and look for recompense,
  More than that tongue that more hath more express'd.
    O! learn to read what silent love hath writ:
    To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.

  XXIV

  Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd,
  Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
  My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
  And perspective it is best painter's art.
  For through the painter must you see his skill,
  To find where your true image pictur'd lies,
  Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
  That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
  Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
  Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
  Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
  Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
    Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
    They draw but what they see, know not the heart.

  XXV

  Let those who are in favour with their stars
  Of public honour and proud titles boast,
  Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars
  Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
  Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
  But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
  And in themselves their pride lies buried,
  For at a frown they in their glory die.
  The painful warrior famoused for fight,
  After a thousand victories once foil'd,
  Is from the book of honour razed quite,
  And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd:
    Then happy I, that love and am belov'd,
    Where I may not remove nor be remov'd.

  XXVI

  Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage
  Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
  To thee I send this written embassage,
  To witness duty, not to show my wit:
  Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
  May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it,
  But that I hope some good conceit of thine
  In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it:
  Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
  Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
  And puts apparel on my tatter'd loving,
  To show me worthy of thy sweet respect:
    Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
    Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.

  XXVII

  Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
  The dear respose for limbs with travel tir'd;
  But then begins a journey in my head
  To work my mind, when body's work's expired:
  For then my thoughts--from far where I abide--
  Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
  And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
  Looking on darkness which the blind do see:
  Save that my soul's imaginary sight
  Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
  Which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night,
  Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.
    Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,
    For thee, and for myself, no quiet find.

  XXVIII

  How can I then return in happy plight,
  That am debarre'd the benefit of rest?
  When day's oppression is not eas'd by night,
  But day by night and night by day oppress'd,
  And each, though enemies to either's reign,
  Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
  The one by toil, the other to complain
  How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
  I tell the day, to please him thou art bright,
  And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
  So flatter I the swart-complexion'd night,
  When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.
    But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
    And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger.

  XXIX

  When in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes
  I all alone beweep my outcast state,
  And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
  And look upon myself, and curse my fate,
  Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
  Featur'd like him, like him with friends possess'd,
  Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope,
  With what I most enjoy contented least;
  Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
  Haply I think on thee,-- and then my state,
  Like to the lark at break of day arising
  From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate;
    For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings
    That then I scorn to change my state with kings.

  XXX

  When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
  I summon up remembrance of things past,
  I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
  And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste:
  Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
  For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
  And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe,
  And moan the expense of many a vanish'd sight:
  Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
  And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
  The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
  Which I new pay as if not paid before.
    But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
    All losses are restor'd and sorrows end.

  XXXI

  Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
  Which I by lacking have supposed dead;
  And there reigns Love, and all Love's loving parts,
  And all those friends which I thought buried.
  How many a holy and obsequious tear
  Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye,
  As interest of the dead, which now appear
  But things remov'd that hidden in thee lie!
  Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
  Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
  Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
  That due of many now is thine alone:
    Their images I lov'd, I view in thee,
    And thou--all they--hast all the all of me.

  XXXII

  If thou survive my well-contented day,
  When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover
  And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
  These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
  Compare them with the bett'ring of the time,
  And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
  Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
  Exceeded by the height of happier men.
  O! then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
  'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,
  A dearer birth than this his love had brought,
  To march in ranks of better equipage:
    But since he died and poets better prove,
    Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'.

  XXXIII

  Full many a glorious morning have I seen
  Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
  Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
  Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;
  Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
  With ugly rack on his celestial face,
  And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
  Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:
  Even so my sun one early morn did shine,
  With all triumphant splendour on my brow;
  But out! alack! he was but one hour mine,
  The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now.
    Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
    Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.

  XXXIV

  Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
  And make me travel forth without my cloak,
  To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
  Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?
  'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
  To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
  For no man well of such a salve can speak,
  That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
  Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;
  Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:
  The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
  To him that bears the strong offence's cross.
    Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
    And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.

  XXXV

  No more be griev'd at that which thou hast done:
  Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud:
  Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
  And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
  All men make faults, and even I in this,
  Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
  Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,
  Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are;
  For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense,--
  Thy adverse party is thy advocate,--
  And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence:
  Such civil war is in my love and hate,
    That I an accessary needs must be,
    To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.

  XXXVI

  Let me confess that we two must be twain,
  Although our undivided loves are one:
  So shall those blots that do with me remain,
  Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
  In our two loves there is but one respect,
  Though in our lives a separable spite,
  Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
  Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
  I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
  Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
  Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
  Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
    But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
    As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.

  XXXVII

  As a decrepit father takes delight
  To see his active child do deeds of youth,
  So I, made lame by Fortune's dearest spite,
  Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth;
  For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
  Or any of these all, or all, or more,
  Entitled in thy parts, do crowned sit,
  I make my love engrafted, to this store:
  So then I am not lame, poor, nor despis'd,
  Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give
  That I in thy abundance am suffic'd,
  And by a part of all thy glory live.
    Look what is best, that best I wish in thee:
    This wish I have; then ten times happy me!

  XXXVIII

  How can my muse want subject to invent,
  While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse
  Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
  For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
  O! give thy self the thanks, if aught in me
  Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
  For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
  When thou thy self dost give invention light?
  Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
  Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;
  And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
  Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
    If my slight muse do please these curious days,
    The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.

  XXXIX

  O! how thy worth with manners may I sing,
  When thou art all the better part of me?
  What can mine own praise to mine own self bring?
  And what is't but mine own when I praise thee?
  Even for this, let us divided live,
  And our dear love lose name of single one,
  That by this separation I may give
  That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone.
  O absence! what a torment wouldst thou prove,
  Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave,
  To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
  Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,
    And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
    By praising him here who doth hence remain.

  XL

  Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all;
  What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
  No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;
  All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more.
  Then, if for my love, thou my love receivest,
  I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest;
  But yet be blam'd, if thou thy self deceivest
  By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.
  I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,
  Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
  And yet, love knows it is a greater grief
  To bear love's wrong, than hate's known injury.
    Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
    Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.

  XLI

  Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
  When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
  Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits,
  For still temptation follows where thou art.
  Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
  Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assail'd;
  And when a woman woos, what woman's son
  Will sourly leave her till he have prevail'd?
  Ay me! but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
  And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth,
  Who lead thee in their riot even there
  Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:--
    Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
    Thine by thy beauty being false to me.

  XLII

  That thou hast her it is not all my grief,
  And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;
  That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
  A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
  Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye:
  Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her;
  And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
  Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.
  If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
  And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;
  Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
  And both for my sake lay on me this cross:
    But here's the joy; my friend and I are one;
    Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.

  XLIII

  When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
  For all the day they view things unrespected;
  But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
  And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
  Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
  How would thy shadow's form form happy show
  To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
  When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
  How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made
  By looking on thee in the living day,
  When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade
  Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
    All days are nights to see till I see thee,
    And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.

  XLIV

  If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
  Injurious distance should not stop my way;
  For then despite of space I would be brought,
  From limits far remote, where thou dost stay.
  No matter then although my foot did stand
  Upon the farthest earth remov'd from thee;
  For nimble thought can jump both sea and land,
  As soon as think the place where he would be.
  But, ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,
  To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
  But that so much of earth and water wrought,
  I must attend time's leisure with my moan;
    Receiving nought by elements so slow
    But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.

  XLV

  The other two, slight air, and purging fire
  Are both with thee, wherever I abide;
  The first my thought, the other my desire,
  These present-absent with swift motion slide.
  For when these quicker elements are gone
  In tender embassy of love to thee,
  My life, being made of four, with two alone
  Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy;
  Until life's composition be recur'd
  By those swift messengers return'd from thee,
  Who even but now come back again, assur'd,
  Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:
    This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
    I send them back again, and straight grow sad.

  XLVI

  Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war,
  How to divide the conquest of thy sight;
  Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar,
  My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.
  My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,--
  A closet never pierc'd with crystal eyes--
  But the defendant doth that plea deny,
  And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
  To side this title is impannelled
  A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart;
  And by their verdict is determined
  The clear eye's moiety, and the dear heart's part:
    As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part,
    And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.

  XLVII

  Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
  And each doth good turns now unto the other:
  When that mine eye is famish'd for a look,
  Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,
  With my love's picture then my eye doth feast,
  And to the painted banquet bids my heart;
  Another time mine eye is my heart's guest,
  And in his thoughts of love doth share a part:
  So, either by thy picture or my love,
  Thy self away, art present still with me;
  For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
  And I am still with them, and they with thee;
    Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
    Awakes my heart, to heart's and eye's delight.

  XLVIII

  How careful was I when I took my way,
  Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
  That to my use it might unused stay
  From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
  But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
  Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
  Thou best of dearest, and mine only care,
  Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
  Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest,
  Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
  Within the gentle closure of my breast,
  From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;
    And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear,
    For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.

  XLIX

  Against that time, if ever that time come,
  When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
  When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
  Call'd to that audit by advis'd respects;
  Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass,
  And scarcely greet me with that sun, thine eye,
  When love, converted from the thing it was,
  Shall reasons find of settled gravity;
  Against that time do I ensconce me here,
  Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
  And this my hand, against my self uprear,
  To guard the lawful reasons on thy part:
    To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,
    Since why to love I can allege no cause.

  L

  How heavy do I journey on the way,
  When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
  Doth teach that ease and that repose to say,
  'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!'
  The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
  Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
  As if by some instinct the wretch did know
  His rider lov'd not speed, being made from thee:
  The bloody spur cannot provoke him on,
  That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
  Which heavily he answers with a groan,
  More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
    For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
    My grief lies onward, and my joy behind.

  LI

  Thus can my love excuse the slow offence
  Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:
  From where thou art why should I haste me thence?
  Till I return, of posting is no need.
  O! what excuse will my poor beast then find,
  When swift extremity can seem but slow?
  Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind,
  In winged speed no motion shall I know,
  Then can no horse with my desire keep pace;
  Therefore desire, of perfect'st love being made,
  Shall neigh--no dull flesh--in his fiery race;
  But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade,--
    'Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
    Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.'

  LII

  So am I as the rich, whose blessed key,
  Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
  The which he will not every hour survey,
  For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
  Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
  Since, seldom coming in that long year set,
  Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
  Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
  So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
  Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
  To make some special instant special-blest,
  By new unfolding his imprison'd pride.
    Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
    Being had, to triumph; being lacked, to hope.

  LIII

  What is your substance, whereof are you made,
  That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
  Since every one, hath every one, one shade,
  And you but one, can every shadow lend.
  Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit
  Is poorly imitated after you;
  On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
  And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
  Speak of the spring, and foison of the year,
  The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
  The other as your bounty doth appear;
  And you in every blessed shape we know.
    In all external grace you have some part,
    But you like none, none you, for constant heart.

  LIV

  O! how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
  By that sweet ornament which truth doth give.
  The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
  For that sweet odour, which doth in it live.
  The canker blooms have full as deep a dye
  As the perfumed tincture of the roses.
  Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly
  When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:
  But, for their virtue only is their show,
  They live unwoo'd, and unrespected fade;
  Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
  Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made:
    And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
    When that shall vade, by verse distills your truth.

  LV

  Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
  Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
  But you shall shine more bright in these contents
  Than unswept stone, besmear'd with sluttish time.
  When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
  And broils root out the work of masonry,
  Nor Mars his sword, nor war's quick fire shall burn
  The living record of your memory.
  'Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity
  Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
  Even in the eyes of all posterity
  That wear this world out to the ending doom.
    So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
    You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.

  LVI

  Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said
  Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
  Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd,
  To-morrow sharpened in his former might:
  So, love, be thou, although to-day thou fill
  Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness,
  To-morrow see again, and do not kill
  The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness.
  Let this sad interim like the ocean be
  Which parts the shore, where two contracted new
  Come daily to the banks, that when they see
  Return of love, more blest may be the view;
    Or call it winter, which being full of care,
    Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.

  LVII

  Being your slave what should I do but tend,
  Upon the hours, and times of your desire?
  I have no precious time at all to spend;
  Nor services to do, till you require.
  Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
  Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
  Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
  When you have bid your servant once adieu;
  Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
  Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
  But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
  Save, where you are, how happy you make those.
    So true a fool is love, that in your will,
    Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.

  LVIII

  That god forbid, that made me first your slave,
  I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
  Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,
  Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!
  O! let me suffer, being at your beck,
  The imprison'd absence of your liberty;
  And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check,
  Without accusing you of injury.
  Be where you list, your charter is so strong
  That you yourself may privilage your time
  To what you will; to you it doth belong
  Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.
    I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
    Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.

  LIX

  If there be nothing new, but that which is
  Hath been before, how are our brains beguil'd,
  Which labouring for invention bear amiss
  The second burthen of a former child!
  O! that record could with a backward look,
  Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
  Show me your image in some antique book,
  Since mind at first in character was done!
  That I might see what the old world could say
  To this composed wonder of your frame;
  Wh'r we are mended, or wh'r better they,
  Or whether revolution be the same.
    O! sure I am the wits of former days,
    To subjects worse have given admiring praise.

  LX

  Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
  So do our minutes hasten to their end;
  Each changing place with that which goes before,
  In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
  Nativity, once in the main of light,
  Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,
  Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight,
  And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
  Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth
  And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,
  Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
  And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:
    And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand.
    Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.

  LXI

  Is it thy will, thy image should keep open
  My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
  Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
  While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
  Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
  So far from home into my deeds to pry,
  To find out shames and idle hours in me,
  The scope and tenure of thy jealousy?
  O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:
  It is my love that keeps mine eye awake:
  Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
  To play the watchman ever for thy sake:
    For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
    From me far off, with others all too near.

  LXII

  Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye
  And all my soul, and all my every part;
  And for this sin there is no remedy,
  It is so grounded inward in my heart.
  Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
  No shape so true, no truth of such account;
  And for myself mine own worth do define,
  As I all other in all worths surmount.
  But when my glass shows me myself indeed
  Beated and chopp'd with tanned antiquity,
  Mine own self-love quite contrary I read;
  Self so self-loving were iniquity.
    'Tis thee,--myself,--that for myself I praise,
    Painting my age with beauty of thy days.

  LXIII

  Against my love shall be as I am now,
  With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'erworn;
  When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow
  With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn
  Hath travell'd on to age's steepy night;
  And all those beauties whereof now he's king
  Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight,
  Stealing away the treasure of his spring;
  For such a time do I now fortify
  Against confounding age's cruel knife,
  That he shall never cut from memory
  My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life:
    His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
    And they shall live, and he in them still green.

  LXIV

  When I have seen by Time's fell hand defac'd
  The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age;
  When sometime lofty towers I see down-raz'd,
  And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
  When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
  Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
  And the firm soil win of the watery main,
  Increasing store with loss, and loss with store;
  When I have seen such interchange of state,
  Or state itself confounded, to decay;
  Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate--
  That Time will come and take my love away.
    This thought is as a death which cannot choose
    But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.

  LXV

  Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
  But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
  How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
  Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
  O! how shall summer's honey breath hold out,
  Against the wrackful siege of battering days,
  When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
  Nor gates of steel so strong but Time decays?
  O fearful meditation! where, alack,
  Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
  Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?
  Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
    O! none, unless this miracle have might,
    That in black ink my love may still shine bright.

  LXVI

  Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,
  As to behold desert a beggar born,
  And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,
  And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
  And gilded honour shamefully misplac'd,
  And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
  And right perfection wrongfully disgrac'd,
  And strength by limping sway disabled
  And art made tongue-tied by authority,
  And folly--doctor-like--controlling skill,
  And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,
  And captive good attending captain ill:
    Tir'd with all these, from these would I be gone,
    Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.

  LXVII

  Ah! wherefore with infection should he live,
  And with his presence grace impiety,
  That sin by him advantage should achieve,
  And lace itself with his society?
  Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
  And steel dead seeming of his living hue?
  Why should poor beauty indirectly seek
  Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
  Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,
  Beggar'd of blood to blush through lively veins?
  For she hath no exchequer now but his,
  And proud of many, lives upon his gains.
    O! him she stores, to show what wealth she had
    In days long since, before these last so bad.

  LXVIII

  Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
  When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
  Before these bastard signs of fair were born,
  Or durst inhabit on a living brow;
  Before the golden tresses of the dead,
  The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
  To live a second life on second head;
  Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:
  In him those holy antique hours are seen,
  Without all ornament, itself and true,
  Making no summer of another's green,
  Robbing no old to dress his beauty new;
    And him as for a map doth Nature store,
    To show false Art what beauty was of yore.

  LXIX

  Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view
  Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend;
  All tongues--the voice of souls--give thee that due,
  Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
  Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd;
  But those same tongues, that give thee so thine own,
  In other accents do this praise confound
  By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
  They look into the beauty of thy mind,
  And that in guess they measure by thy deeds;
  Then--churls--their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,
  To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:
    But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
    The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.

  LXX

  That thou art blam'd shall not be thy defect,
  For slander's mark was ever yet the fair;
  The ornament of beauty is suspect,
  A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
  So thou be good, slander doth but approve
  Thy worth the greater being woo'd of time;
  For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
  And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
  Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days
  Either not assail'd, or victor being charg'd;
  Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
  To tie up envy, evermore enlarg'd,
    If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show,
    Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.

  LXXI

  No longer mourn for me when I am dead
  Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
  Give warning to the world that I am fled
  From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell:
  Nay, if you read this line, remember not
  The hand that writ it, for I love you so,
  That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
  If thinking on me then should make you woe.
  O! if,--I say you look upon this verse,
  When I perhaps compounded am with clay,
  Do not so much as my poor name rehearse;
  But let your love even with my life decay;
    Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
    And mock you with me after I am gone.

  LXXII

  O! lest the world should task you to recite
  What merit lived in me, that you should love
  After my death,--dear love, forget me quite,
  For you in me can nothing worthy prove;
  Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
  To do more for me than mine own desert,
  And hang more praise upon deceased I
  Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
  O! lest your true love may seem false in this
  That you for love speak well of me untrue,
  My name be buried where my body is,
  And live no more to shame nor me nor you.
    For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
    And so should you, to love things nothing worth.

  LXXIII

  That time of year thou mayst in me behold
  When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
  Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
  Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
  In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
  As after sunset fadeth in the west;
  Which by and by black night doth take away,
  Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
  In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire,
  That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
  As the death-bed, whereon it must expire,
  Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by.
    This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
    To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.

  LXXIV

  But be contented: when that fell arrest
  Without all bail shall carry me away,
  My life hath in this line some interest,
  Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
  When thou reviewest this, thou dost review
  The very part was consecrate to thee:
  The earth can have but earth, which is his due;
  My spirit is thine, the better part of me:
  So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
  The prey of worms, my body being dead;
  The coward conquest of a wretch's knife,
  Too base of thee to be remembered.
    The worth of that is that which it contains,
    And that is this, and this with thee remains.

  LXXV

  So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
  Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground;
  And for the peace of you I hold such strife
  As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
  Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
  Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure;
  Now counting best to be with you alone,
  Then better'd that the world may see my pleasure:
  Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
  And by and by clean starved for a look;
  Possessing or pursuing no delight,
  Save what is had, or must from you be took.
    Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
    Or gluttoning on all, or all away.

  LXXVI

  Why is my verse so barren of new pride,
  So far from variation or quick change?
  Why with the time do I not glance aside
  To new-found methods, and to compounds strange?
  Why write I still all one, ever the same,
  And keep invention in a noted weed,
  That every word doth almost tell my name,
  Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
  O! know sweet love I always write of you,
  And you and love are still my argument;
  So all my best is dressing old words new,
  Spending again what is already spent:
    For as the sun is daily new and old,
    So is my love still telling what is told.

  LXXVII

  Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
  Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
  These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
  And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste.
  The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show
  Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;
  Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
  Time's thievish progress to eternity.
  Look! what thy memory cannot contain,
  Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
  Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain,
  To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
    These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
    Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.

  LXXVIII

  So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse,
  And found such fair assistance in my verse
  As every alien pen hath got my use
  And under thee their poesy disperse.
  Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing
  And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
  Have added feathers to the learned's wing
  And given grace a double majesty.
  Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
  Whose influence is thine, and born of thee:
  In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
  And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;
    But thou art all my art, and dost advance
    As high as learning, my rude ignorance.

  LXXIX

  Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
  My verse alone had all thy gentle grace;
  But now my gracious numbers are decay'd,
  And my sick Muse doth give an other place.
  I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument
  Deserves the travail of a worthier pen;
  Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent
  He robs thee of, and pays it thee again.
  He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word
  From thy behaviour; beauty doth he give,
  And found it in thy cheek: he can afford
  No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.
    Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
    Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay.

  LXXX

  O! how I faint when I of you do write,
  Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
  And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
  To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame!
  But since your worth--wide as the ocean is,--
  The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
  My saucy bark, inferior far to his,
  On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
  Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
  Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride;
  Or, being wrack'd, I am a worthless boat,
  He of tall building, and of goodly pride:
    Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
    The worst was this,--my love was my decay.

  LXXXI

  Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
  Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;
  From hence your memory death cannot take,
  Although in me each part will be forgotten.
  Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
  Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:
  The earth can yield me but a common grave,
  When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
  Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
  Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read;
  And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse,
  When all the breathers of this world are dead;
    You still shall live,--such virtue hath my pen,--
    Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.

  LXXXII

  I grant thou wert not married to my Muse,
  And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
  The dedicated words which writers use
  Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
  Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
  Finding thy worth a limit past my praise;
  And therefore art enforced to seek anew
  Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
  And do so, love; yet when they have devis'd,
  What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
  Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathiz'd
  In true plain words, by thy true-telling friend;
    And their gross painting might be better us'd
    Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abus'd.

  LXXXIII

  I never saw that you did painting need,
  And therefore to your fair no painting set;
  I found, or thought I found, you did exceed
  That barren tender of a poet's debt:
  And therefore have I slept in your report,
  That you yourself, being extant, well might show
  How far a modern quill doth come too short,
  Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
  This silence for my sin you did impute,
  Which shall be most my glory being dumb;
  For I impair not beauty being mute,
  When others would give life, and bring a tomb.
    There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
    Than both your poets can in praise devise.

  LXXXIV

  Who is it that says most, which can say more,
  Than this rich praise,--that you alone, are you?
  In whose confine immured is the store
  Which should example where your equal grew.
  Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
  That to his subject lends not some small glory;
  But he that writes of you, if he can tell
  That you are you, so dignifies his story,
  Let him but copy what in you is writ,
  Not making worse what nature made so clear,
  And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
  Making his style admired every where.
    You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
    Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.

  LXXXV

  My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still,
  While comments of your praise richly compil'd,
  Reserve their character with golden quill,
  And precious phrase by all the Muses fil'd.
  I think good thoughts, whilst others write good words,
  And like unlettered clerk still cry 'Amen'
  To every hymn that able spirit affords,
  In polish'd form of well-refined pen.
  Hearing you praised, I say ''tis so, 'tis true,'
  And to the most of praise add something more;
  But that is in my thought, whose love to you,
  Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.
    Then others, for the breath of words respect,
    Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.

  LXXXVI

  Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
  Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
  That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
  Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
  Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
  Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
  No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
  Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
  He, nor that affable familiar ghost
  Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
  As victors of my silence cannot boast;
  I was not sick of any fear from thence:
    But when your countenance fill'd up his line,
    Then lacked I matter; that enfeebled mine.

  LXXXVII

  Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
  And like enough thou know'st thy estimate,
  The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;
  My bonds in thee are all determinate.
  For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
  And for that riches where is my deserving?
  The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
  And so my patent back again is swerving.
  Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing,
  Or me to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking;
  So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
  Comes home again, on better judgement making.
    Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,
    In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.

  LXXXVIII

  When thou shalt be dispos'd to set me light,
  And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
  Upon thy side, against myself I'll fight,
  And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.
  With mine own weakness, being best acquainted,
  Upon thy part I can set down a story
  Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted;
  That thou in losing me shalt win much glory:
  And I by this will be a gainer too;
  For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
  The injuries that to myself I do,
  Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
    Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
    That for thy right, myself will bear all wrong.

  LXXXIX

  Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
  And I will comment upon that offence:
  Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt,
  Against thy reasons making no defence.
  Thou canst not love disgrace me half so ill,
  To set a form upon desired change,
  As I'll myself disgrace; knowing thy will,
  I will acquaintance strangle, and look strange;
  Be absent from thy walks; and in my tongue
  Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
  Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong,
  And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
    For thee, against my self I'll vow debate,
    For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.

  XC

  Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;
  Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
  Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
  And do not drop in for an after-loss:
  Ah! do not, when my heart hath 'scap'd this sorrow,
  Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe;
  Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
  To linger out a purpos'd overthrow.
  If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
  When other petty griefs have done their spite,
  But in the onset come: so shall I taste
  At first the very worst of fortune's might;
    And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
    Compar'd with loss of thee, will not seem so.

  XCI

  Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
  Some in their wealth, some in their body's force,
  Some in their garments though new-fangled ill;
  Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
  And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
  Wherein it finds a joy above the rest:
  But these particulars are not my measure,
  All these I better in one general best.
  Thy love is better than high birth to me,
  Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' costs,
  Of more delight than hawks and horses be;
  And having thee, of all men's pride I boast:
    Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take
    All this away, and me most wretchcd make.

  XCII

  But do thy worst to steal thyself away,
  For term of life thou art assured mine;
  And life no longer than thy love will stay,
  For it depends upon that love of thine.
  Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
  When in the least of them my life hath end.
  I see a better state to me belongs
  Than that which on thy humour doth depend:
  Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
  Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.
  O! what a happy title do I find,
  Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
    But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
    Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.

  XCIII

  So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
  Like a deceived husband; so love's face
  May still seem love to me, though alter'd new;
  Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place:
  For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
  Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
  In many's looks, the false heart's history
  Is writ in moods, and frowns, and wrinkles strange.
  But heaven in thy creation did decree
  That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
  Whate'er thy thoughts, or thy heart's workings be,
  Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.
    How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
    If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!

  XCIV

  They that have power to hurt, and will do none,
  That do not do the thing they most do show,
  Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,
  Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow;
  They rightly do inherit heaven's graces,
  And husband nature's riches from expense;
  They are the lords and owners of their faces,
  Others, but stewards of their excellence.
  The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
  Though to itself, it only live and die,
  But if that flower with base infection meet,
  The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
    For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;
    Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.

  XCV

  How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
  Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
  Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
  O! in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose.
  That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
  Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
  Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise;
  Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
  O! what a mansion have those vices got
  Which for their habitation chose out thee,
  Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot
  And all things turns to fair that eyes can see!
    Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;
    The hardest knife ill-us'd doth lose his edge.

  XCVI

  Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;
  Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport;
  Both grace and faults are lov'd of more and less:
  Thou mak'st faults graces that to thee resort.
  As on the finger of a throned queen
  The basest jewel will be well esteem'd,
  So are those errors that in thee are seen
  To truths translated, and for true things deem'd.
  How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
  If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
  How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
  if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
    But do not so; I love thee in such sort,
    As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.

  XCVII

  How like a winter hath my absence been
  From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
  What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
  What old December's bareness everywhere!
  And yet this time removed was summer's time;
  The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
  Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
  Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease:
  Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me
  But hope of orphans, and unfather'd fruit;
  For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
  And, thou away, the very birds are mute:
    Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
    That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.

  XCVIII

  From you have I been absent in the spring,
  When proud-pied April, dress'd in all his trim,
  Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,
  That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him.
  Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
  Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
  Could make me any summer's story tell,
  Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
  Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
  Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
  They were but sweet, but figures of delight,
  Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
    Yet seem'd it winter still, and you away,
    As with your shadow I with these did play.

  XCIX

  The forward violet thus did I chide:
  Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
  If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
  Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells
  In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dy'd.
  The lily I condemned for thy hand,
  And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair;
  The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
  One blushing shame, another white despair;
  A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both,
  And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath;
  But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth
  A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
    More flowers I noted, yet I none could see,
    But sweet, or colour it had stol'n from thee.

  C

  Where art thou Muse that thou forget'st so long,
  To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
  Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
  Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
  Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem,
  In gentle numbers time so idly spent;
  Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem
  And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
  Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey,
  If Time have any wrinkle graven there;
  If any, be a satire to decay,
  And make time's spoils despised every where.
    Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,
    So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.

  CI

  O truant Muse what shall be thy amends
  For thy neglect of truth in beauty dy'd?
  Both truth and beauty on my love depends;
  So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
  Make answer Muse: wilt thou not haply say,
  'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd;
  Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay;
  But best is best, if never intermix'd'?
  Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
  Excuse not silence so, for't lies in thee
  To make him much outlive a gilded tomb
  And to be prais'd of ages yet to be.
    Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how
    To make him seem long hence as he shows now.

  CII

  My love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming;
  I love not less, though less the show appear;
  That love is merchandiz'd, whose rich esteeming,
  The owner's tongue doth publish every where.
  Our love was new, and then but in the spring,
  When I was wont to greet it with my lays;
  As Philomel in summer's front doth sing,
  And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:
  Not that the summer is less pleasant now
  Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
  But that wild music burthens every bough,
  And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
    Therefore like her, I sometime hold my tongue:
    Because I would not dull you with my song.

  CIII

  Alack! what poverty my Muse brings forth,
  That having such a scope to show her pride,
  The argument, all bare, is of more worth
  Than when it hath my added praise beside!
  O! blame me not, if I no more can write!
  Look in your glass, and there appears a face
  That over-goes my blunt invention quite,
  Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
  Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,
  To mar the subject that before was well?
  For to no other pass my verses tend
  Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;
    And more, much more, than in my verse can sit,
    Your own glass shows you when you look in it.

  CIV

  To me, fair friend, you never can be old,
  For as you were when first your eye I ey'd,
  Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold,
  Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
  Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd,
  In process of the seasons have I seen,
  Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd,
  Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
  Ah! yet doth beauty like a dial-hand,
  Steal from his figure, and no pace perceiv'd;
  So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
  Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceiv'd:
    For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred:
    Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.

  CV

  Let not my love be call'd idolatry,
  Nor my beloved as an idol show,
  Since all alike my songs and praises be
  To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
  Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,
  Still constant in a wondrous excellence;
  Therefore my verse to constancy confin'd,
  One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
  'Fair, kind, and true,' is all my argument,
  'Fair, kind, and true,' varying to other words;
  And in this change is my invention spent,
  Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
    Fair, kind, and true, have often liv'd alone,
    Which three till now, never kept seat in one.

  CVI

  When in the chronicle of wasted time
  I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
  And beauty making beautiful old rime,
  In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,
  Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,
  Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
  I see their antique pen would have express'd
  Even such a beauty as you master now.
  So all their praises are but prophecies
  Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
  And for they looked but with divining eyes,
  They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
    For we, which now behold these present days,
    Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.

  CVII

  Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
  Of the wide world dreaming on things to come,
  Can yet the lease of my true love control,
  Supposed as forfeit to a confin'd doom.
  The mortal moon hath her eclipse endur'd,
  And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
  Incertainties now crown themselves assur'd,
  And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
  Now with the drops of this most balmy time,
  My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes,
  Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rime,
  While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes:
    And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
    When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.

  CVIII

  What's in the brain, that ink may character,
  Which hath not figur'd to thee my true spirit?
  What's new to speak, what now to register,
  That may express my love, or thy dear merit?
  Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,
  I must each day say o'er the very same;
  Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
  Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name.
  So that eternal love in love's fresh case,
  Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
  Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
  But makes antiquity for aye his page;
    Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
    Where time and outward form would show it dead.

  CIX

  O! never say that I was false of heart,
  Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify,
  As easy might I from my self depart
  As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie:
  That is my home of love: if I have rang'd,
  Like him that travels, I return again;
  Just to the time, not with the time exchang'd,
  So that myself bring water for my stain.
  Never believe though in my nature reign'd,
  All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
  That it could so preposterously be stain'd,
  To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;
    For nothing this wide universe I call,
    Save thou, my rose, in it thou art my all.

  CX

  Alas! 'tis true, I have gone here and there,
  And made my self a motley to the view,
  Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
  Made old offences of affections new;
  Most true it is, that I have look'd on truth
  Askance and strangely; but, by all above,
  These blenches gave my heart another youth,
  And worse essays prov'd thee my best of love.
  Now all is done, save what shall have no end:
  Mine appetite I never more will grind
  On newer proof, to try an older friend,
  A god in love, to whom I am confin'd.
    Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
    Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.

  CXI

  O! for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
  The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
  That did not better for my life provide
  Than public means which public manners breeds.
  Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
  And almost thence my nature is subdu'd
  To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:
  Pity me, then, and wish I were renew'd;
  Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink,
  Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection;
  No bitterness that I will bitter think,
  Nor double penance, to correct correction.
    Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye,
    Even that your pity is enough to cure me.

  CXII

  Your love and pity doth the impression fill,
  Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow;
  For what care I who calls me well or ill,
  So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow?
  You are my all-the-world, and I must strive
  To know my shames and praises from your tongue;
  None else to me, nor I to none alive,
  That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong.
  In so profound abysm I throw all care
  Of others' voices, that my adder's sense
  To critic and to flatterer stopped are.
  Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:
    You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
    That all the world besides methinks are dead.

  CXIII

  Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind;
  And that which governs me to go about
  Doth part his function and is partly blind,
  Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
  For it no form delivers to the heart
  Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch:
  Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
  Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch;
  For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight,
  The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature,
  The mountain or the sea, the day or night:
  The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
    Incapable of more, replete with you,
    My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.

  CXIV

  Or whether doth my mind, being crown'd with you,
  Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?
  Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true,
  And that your love taught it this alchemy,
  To make of monsters and things indigest
  Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
  Creating every bad a perfect best,
  As fast as objects to his beams assemble?
  O! 'tis the first, 'tis flattery in my seeing,
  And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:
  Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing,
  And to his palate doth prepare the cup:
    If it be poison'd, 'tis the lesser sin
    That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.

  CXV

  Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
  Even those that said I could not love you dearer:
  Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
  My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
  But reckoning Time, whose million'd accidents
  Creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings,
  Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,
  Divert strong minds to the course of altering things;
  Alas! why fearing of Time's tyranny,
  Might I not then say, 'Now I love you best,'
  When I was certain o'er incertainty,
  Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
    Love is a babe, then might I not say so,
    To give full growth to that which still doth grow?

  CXVI

  Let me not to the marriage of true minds
  Admit impediments. Love is not love
  Which alters when it alteration finds,
  Or bends with the remover to remove:
  O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark,
  That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
  It is the star to every wandering bark,
  Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
  Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
  Within his bending sickle's compass come;
  Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
  But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
    If this be error and upon me prov'd,
    I never writ, nor no man ever lov'd.

  CXVII

  Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all,
  Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
  Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
  Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;
  That I have frequent been with unknown minds,
  And given to time your own dear-purchas'd right;
  That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
  Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
  Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
  And on just proof surmise, accumulate;
  Bring me within the level of your frown,
  But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate;
    Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
    The constancy and virtue of your love.

  CXVIII

  Like as, to make our appetite more keen,
  With eager compounds we our palate urge;
  As, to prevent our maladies unseen,
  We sicken to shun sickness when we purge;
  Even so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness,
  To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
  And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness
  To be diseas'd, ere that there was true needing.
  Thus policy in love, to anticipate
  The ills that were not, grew to faults assur'd,
  And brought to medicine a healthful state
  Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cur'd;
    But thence I learn and find the lesson true,
    Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.

  CXIX

  What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,
  Distill'd from limbecks foul as hell within,
  Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
  Still losing when I saw myself to win!
  What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
  Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!
  How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted,
  In the distraction of this madding fever!
  O benefit of ill! now I find true
  That better is, by evil still made better;
  And ruin'd love, when it is built anew,
  Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
    So I return rebuk'd to my content,
    And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.

  CXX

  That you were once unkind befriends me now,
  And for that sorrow, which I then did feel,
  Needs must I under my transgression bow,
  Unless my nerves were brass or hammer'd steel.
  For if you were by my unkindness shaken,
  As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time;
  And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken
  To weigh how once I suffer'd in your crime.
  O! that our night of woe might have remember'd
  My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
  And soon to you, as you to me, then tender'd
  The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits!
    But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
    Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.

  CXXI

  'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd,
  When not to be receives reproach of being;
  And the just pleasure lost, which is so deem'd
  Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing:
  For why should others' false adulterate eyes
  Give salutation to my sportive blood?
  Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
  Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
  No, I am that I am, and they that level
  At my abuses reckon up their own:
  I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
  By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown;
    Unless this general evil they maintain,
    All men are bad and in their badness reign.

  CXXII

  Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
  Full character'd with lasting memory,
  Which shall above that idle rank remain,
  Beyond all date; even to eternity:
  Or, at the least, so long as brain and heart
  Have faculty by nature to subsist;
  Till each to raz'd oblivion yield his part
  Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd.
  That poor retention could not so much hold,
  Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;
  Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
  To trust those tables that receive thee more:
    To keep an adjunct to remember thee
    Were to import forgetfulness in me.

  CXXIII

  No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change:
  Thy pyramids built up with newer might
  To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;
  They are but dressings of a former sight.
  Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire
  What thou dost foist upon us that is old;
  And rather make them born to our desire
  Than think that we before have heard them told.
  Thy registers and thee I both defy,
  Not wondering at the present nor the past,
  For thy records and what we see doth lie,
  Made more or less by thy continual haste.
    This I do vow and this shall ever be;
    I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.

  CXXIV

  If my dear love were but the child of state,
  It might for Fortune's bastard be unfather'd,
  As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate,
  Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd.
  No, it was builded far from accident;
  It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
  Under the blow of thralled discontent,
  Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls:
  It fears not policy, that heretic,
  Which works on leases of short-number'd hours,
  But all alone stands hugely politic,
  That it nor grows with heat, nor drowns with showers.
    To this I witness call the fools of time,
    Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.

  CXXV

  Were't aught to me I bore the canopy,
  With my extern the outward honouring,
  Or laid great bases for eternity,
  Which proves more short than waste or ruining?
  Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
  Lose all and more by paying too much rent
  For compound sweet; forgoing simple savour,
  Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
  No; let me be obsequious in thy heart,
  And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
  Which is not mix'd with seconds, knows no art,
  But mutual render, only me for thee.
    Hence, thou suborned informer! a true soul
    When most impeach'd, stands least in thy control.

  CXXVI

  O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power
  Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his fickle hour;
  Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st
  Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st.
  If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
  As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back,
  She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
  May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.
  Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!
  She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure:
    Her audit (though delayed) answered must be,
    And her quietus is to render thee.

  CXXVII

  In the old age black was not counted fair,
  Or if it were, it bore not beauty's name;
  But now is black beauty's successive heir,
  And beauty slander'd with a bastard shame:
  For since each hand hath put on Nature's power,
  Fairing the foul with Art's false borrowed face,
  Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,
  But is profan'd, if not lives in disgrace.
  Therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black,
  Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem
  At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,
  Sland'ring creation with a false esteem:
    Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe,
    That every tongue says beauty should look so.

  CXXVIII

  How oft when thou, my music, music play'st,
  Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
  With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st
  The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
  Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap,
  To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
  Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap,
  At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand!
  To be so tickled, they would change their state
  And situation with those dancing chips,
  O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
  Making dead wood more bless'd than living lips.
    Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
    Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.

  CXXIX

  The expense of spirit in a waste of shame
  Is lust in action: and till action, lust
  Is perjur'd, murderous, bloody, full of blame,
  Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust;
  Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight;
  Past reason hunted; and no sooner had,
  Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait,
  On purpose laid to make the taker mad:
  Mad in pursuit and in possession so;
  Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme;
  A bliss in proof,-- and prov'd, a very woe;
  Before, a joy propos'd; behind a dream.
    All this the world well knows; yet none knows well
    To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.

  CXXX

  My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun;
  Coral is far more red, than her lips red:
  If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;
  If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
  I have seen roses damask'd, red and white,
  But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
  And in some perfumes is there more delight
  Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
  I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
  That music hath a far more pleasing sound:
  I grant I never saw a goddess go,--
  My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground:
    And yet by heaven, I think my love as rare,
    As any she belied with false compare.

  CXXXI

  Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
  As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
  For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart
  Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
  Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold,
  Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
  To say they err I dare not be so bold,
  Although I swear it to myself alone.
  And to be sure that is not false I swear,
  A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face,
  One on another's neck, do witness bear
  Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.
    In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
    And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.

  CXXXII

  Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
  Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,
  Have put on black and loving mourners be,
  Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
  And truly not the morning sun of heaven
  Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
  Nor that full star that ushers in the even,
  Doth half that glory to the sober west,
  As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
  O! let it then as well beseem thy heart
  To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
  And suit thy pity like in every part.
    Then will I swear beauty herself is black,
    And all they foul that thy complexion lack.

  CXXXIII

  Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
  For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!
  Is't not enough to torture me alone,
  But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
  Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
  And my next self thou harder hast engross'd:
  Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken;
  A torment thrice three-fold thus to be cross'd:
  Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,
  But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;
  Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard;
  Thou canst not then use rigour in my jail:
    And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,
    Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.

  CXXXIV

  So, now I have confess'd that he is thine,
  And I my self am mortgag'd to thy will,
  Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine
  Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
  But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
  For thou art covetous, and he is kind;
  He learn'd but surety-like to write for me,
  Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
  The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
  Thou usurer, that putt'st forth all to use,
  And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
  So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
    Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:
    He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.

  CXXXV

  Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy 'Will,'
  And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in over-plus;
  More than enough am I that vex'd thee still,
  To thy sweet will making addition thus.
  Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
  Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
  Shall will in others seem right gracious,
  And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
  The sea, all water, yet receives rain still,
  And in abundance addeth to his store;
  So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will'
  One will of mine, to make thy large will more.
    Let no unkind 'No' fair beseechers kill;
    Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.'

  CXXXVI

  If thy soul check thee that I come so near,
  Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will',
  And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there;
  Thus far for love, my love-suit, sweet, fulfil.
  'Will', will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
  Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
  In things of great receipt with ease we prove
  Among a number one is reckon'd none:
  Then in the number let me pass untold,
  Though in thy store's account I one must be;
  For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold
  That nothing me, a something sweet to thee:
    Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
    And then thou lov'st me for my name is 'Will.'

  CXXXVII

  Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
  That they behold, and see not what they see?
  They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
  Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
  If eyes, corrupt by over-partial looks,
  Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride,
  Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
  Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
  Why should my heart think that a several plot,
  Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?
  Or mine eyes, seeing this, say this is not,
  To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
    In things right true my heart and eyes have err'd,
    And to this false plague are they now transferr'd.

  CXXXVIII

  When my love swears that she is made of truth,
  I do believe her though I know she lies,
  That she might think me some untutor'd youth,
  Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
  Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
  Although she knows my days are past the best,
  Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue:
  On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed:
  But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
  And wherefore say not I that I am old?
  O! love's best habit is in seeming trust,
  And age in love, loves not to have years told:
    Therefore I lie with her, and she with me,
    And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be.

  CXXXIX

  O! call not me to justify the wrong
  That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
  Wound me not with thine eye, but with thy tongue:
  Use power with power, and slay me not by art,
  Tell me thou lov'st elsewhere; but in my sight,
  Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside:
  What need'st thou wound with cunning, when thy might
  Is more than my o'erpress'd defence can bide?
  Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows
  Her pretty looks have been mine enemies;
  And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
  That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
    Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
    Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain.


  CXL

  Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
  My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain;
  Lest sorrow lend me words, and words express
  The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
  If I might teach thee wit, better it were,
  Though not to love, yet, love to tell me so;--
  As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
  No news but health from their physicians know;--
  For, if I should despair, I should grow mad,
  And in my madness might speak ill of thee;
  Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
  Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.
    That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
    Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.

  CXLI

  In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes,
  For they in thee a thousand errors note;
  But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,
  Who, in despite of view, is pleased to dote.
  Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted;
  Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone,
  Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
  To any sensual feast with thee alone:
  But my five wits nor my five senses can
  Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
  Who leaves unsway'd the likeness of a man,
  Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be:
    Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
    That she that makes me sin awards me pain.

  CXLII

  Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
  Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:
  O! but with mine compare thou thine own state,
  And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;
  Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine,
  That have profan'd their scarlet ornaments
  And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine,
  Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents.
  Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lov'st those
  Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:
  Root pity in thy heart, that, when it grows,
  Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
    If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
    By self-example mayst thou be denied!

  CXLIII

  Lo, as a careful housewife runs to catch
  One of her feather'd creatures broke away,
  Sets down her babe, and makes all swift dispatch
  In pursuit of the thing she would have stay;
  Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
  Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
  To follow that which flies before her face,
  Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
  So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee,
  Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;
  But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,
  And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind;
    So will I pray that thou mayst have thy 'Will,'
    If thou turn back and my loud crying still.

  CXLIV

  Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
  Which like two spirits do suggest me still:
  The better angel is a man right fair,
  The worser spirit a woman colour'd ill.
  To win me soon to hell, my female evil,
  Tempteth my better angel from my side,
  And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
  Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
  And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend,
  Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;
  But being both from me, both to each friend,
  I guess one angel in another's hell:
    Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt,
    Till my bad angel fire my good one out.

  CXLV

  Those lips that Love's own hand did make,
  Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate',
  To me that languish'd for her sake:
  But when she saw my woeful state,
  Straight in her heart did mercy come,
  Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
  Was us'd in giving gentle doom;
  And taught it thus anew to greet;
  'I hate' she alter'd with an end,
  That followed it as gentle day,
  Doth follow night, who like a fiend
  From heaven to hell is flown away.
    'I hate', from hate away she threw,
    And sav'd my life, saying 'not you'.

  CXLVI

  Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
  My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
  Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
  Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
  Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
  Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
  Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
  Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end?
  Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,
  And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
  Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
  Within be fed, without be rich no more:
    So shall thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
    And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.

  CXLVII

  My love is as a fever longing still,
  For that which longer nurseth the disease;
  Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
  The uncertain sickly appetite to please.
  My reason, the physician to my love,
  Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
  Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
  Desire is death, which physic did except.
  Past cure I am, now Reason is past care,
  And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
  My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are,
  At random from the truth vainly express'd;
    For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
    Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.

  CXLVIII

  O me! what eyes hath Love put in my head,
  Which have no correspondence with true sight;
  Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,
  That censures falsely what they see aright?
  If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
  What means the world to say it is not so?
  If it be not, then love doth well denote
  Love's eye is not so true as all men's: no,
  How can it? O! how can Love's eye be true,
  That is so vexed with watching and with tears?
  No marvel then, though I mistake my view;
  The sun itself sees not, till heaven clears.
    O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,
    Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.

  CXLIX

  Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not,
  When I against myself with thee partake?
  Do I not think on thee, when I forgot
  Am of my self, all tyrant, for thy sake?
  Who hateth thee that I do call my friend,
  On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon,
  Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend
  Revenge upon myself with present moan?
  What merit do I in my self respect,
  That is so proud thy service to despise,
  When all my best doth worship thy defect,
  Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
    But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;
    Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind.

  CL

  O! from what power hast thou this powerful might,
  With insufficiency my heart to sway?
  To make me give the lie to my true sight,
  And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
  Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
  That in the very refuse of thy deeds
  There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
  That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?
  Who taught thee how to make me love thee more,
  The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
  O! though I love what others do abhor,
  With others thou shouldst not abhor my state:
    If thy unworthiness rais'd love in me,
    More worthy I to be belov'd of thee.

  CLI

  Love is too young to know what conscience is,
  Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
  Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
  Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:
  For, thou betraying me, I do betray
  My nobler part to my gross body's treason;
  My soul doth tell my body that he may
  Triumph in love; flesh stays no farther reason,
  But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
  As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,
  He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
  To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
    No want of conscience hold it that I call
    Her 'love,' for whose dear love I rise and fall.

  CLII

  In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
  But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing;
  In act thy bed-vow broke, and new faith torn,
  In vowing new hate after new love bearing:
  But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee,
  When I break twenty? I am perjur'd most;
  For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee,
  And all my honest faith in thee is lost:
  For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
  Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy;
  And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness,
  Or made them swear against the thing they see;
    For I have sworn thee fair; more perjur'd I,
    To swear against the truth so foul a lie!

  CLIII

  Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep:
  A maid of Dian's this advantage found,
  And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
  In a cold valley-fountain of that ground;
  Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love,
  A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
  And grew a seeting bath, which yet men prove
  Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
  But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired,
  The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;
  I, sick withal, the help of bath desired,
  And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest,
    But found no cure, the bath for my help lies
    Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress' eyes.

  CLIV

  The little Love-god lying once asleep,
  Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
  Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep
  Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
  The fairest votary took up that fire
  Which many legions of true hearts had warm'd;
  And so the general of hot desire
  Was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarm'd.
  This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
  Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,
  Growing a bath and healthful remedy,
  For men diseas'd; but I, my mistress' thrall,
    Came there for cure and this by that I prove,
    Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.










End of Project Gutenberg's Shakespeare's Sonnets, by William Shakespeare

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHAKESPEARE'S SONNETS ***

***** This file should be named 1041.txt or 1041.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/4/1041/

Produced by Joseph S. Miller and Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University Library. HTML version by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75918 ***





                                STORIES
                                  OF
                               CAPE COD

                                 _by_
                             JACK JOHNSON

                            [Illustration]

A “DISCOVERY BOOK”...

Romantic Facts of All
the Cape Cod Towns




                             Copyright 1944
                            by JACK JOHNSON

                        Designed and printed by
                           THE MEMORIAL PRESS
                        Plymouth, Massachusetts

                            Cover design by
                             Leo Schreiber

                     First Printing August 10, 1944
           Second Aug. 25, Third Sept 11, Fourth Oct. 1, 1944
                           Fifth June 4, 1945

            _For additional copies of this book write_:
              Jack Johnson, Yarmouthport, Cape Cod, Mass.




                              _CONTENTS_

  Bourne                                     1

  Sandwich                                   5

  Falmouth                                   9

  Mashpee                                   13

  Barnstable                                17

  Yarmouthport                              21

  Dennis                                25, 29

  Brewster                                  33

  Harwich                                   37

  Chatham                                   41

  Orleans                               45, 49

  Eastham                                   53

  South Wellfleet                           57

  Admiral Nimitz                            61

  Truro                                     65

  Pioneer Trans-Atlantic Steamship Service  69

  Provincetown                              73

  Cape Cod Fishing                          77

  Cape Cod Beacon                           81

  First Glider Flight in United States      85




BOURNE----

    _300 Years Ago The Pilgrims
    Visioned Cape Cod’s $50,000,000
    Canal_


Myles Standish, the Pilgrim’s engineer, first conceived the idea
for the Cape Cod Canal in 1624. Governor Bradford wished for the
development in order that his fellow pioneers could better carry on
their fur trade with the Dutch in New York. He craved to “avoyd the
compasing of Cap-Codd, and those deangerous shoulds, and so make any
vioage to ye southward in much shorter time, and with far less danger.”

But, the actual building of this eight-mile waterway was delayed for
300 years. August Belmont took over in 1909, and the job consumed five
years and $13,000,000. Later the Government acquired the Canal--to date
the total cost, including periodic dredging and other improvements, is
said to be around $50,000,000.

The Canal has proved to be Cape Cod’s greatest contribution to the
winning of the war.

George Washington saw its military value. In 1776, when he was in
Boston, planning to send troops to New York, Washington observed that
this “interior barrier should be cut in order to give greater security
to navigation, and against the enemy.”


BUILT TO PREVENT SHIPWRECKS

Often the military angle is mentioned in the long and hectic history of
planning the project, but primarily the Canal was visioned to safeguard
shipping in an era when shoals and fogs off this coast took a great
toll of vessels and lives. Also, by speeding up traffic, the Canal was
intended to help in the development of New England commerce.

Prophetic words were uttered by Belmont’s survey engineer while the
construction was under way. These are found in some interesting
material passed on to me by Bill McLaughlin of the Hotel Onset. “The
Canal as planned,” said Engineer Parsons, “is quite sufficiently deep
to take all the smaller vessels of the Navy, even to cruisers.... There
might, however, arise a contingency when the Canal would be of the
greatest value to the country in time of war.”

On the shipwreck problem hereabouts in that day, Parsons noted: “Of all
the wrecks occurring on the whole Atlantic coast from Eastport, Maine,
to Key West, Florida, one-quarter take place in the short stretches
between Chatham and Provincetown.”

Numerous costly attempts were made to put through the waterway, and
failed, before Belmont entered the scene. As the story goes, the
financier was moved largely by sentiment, for when he functioned with
a silver spade at the ceremonious opening of operations it was on land
that once belonged to his ancestors.

Prospects looked bright for another promoting group just before the
Civil War. It appeared the Government would provide a large portion of
the necessary funds. But negotiations halted when the war started.
At a later stage some 500 Italian laborers were imported to Sandwich
from New York and they began work scooping out the ditch, using shovels
and wheelbarrows. This lasted only a few weeks. Another means employed
was a dredge with a chain of buckets, 39 in all, operated by two steam
engines. Lack of capital halted this venture; the dredge was burned and
sunk in the Canal at the spot where operations had started.


FAITH TRIUMPHED IN CRISIS

August Belmont’s engineer found quicksand in the borings when he began
his survey. He was about to write a report to his boss and recommend
that he save his money. But another engineer whose heart was in the
Canal dream argued warmly that the quicksand was confined to the
center and not over the entire bed of the proposed canal. A glacier
had ploughed its way into the waters of Cape Cod Bay, cutting a furrow
through the valley between Sandwich and Buzzards Bay.

The quicksand came of this glacier, declared this authority, and he
added it was not general enough to be a serious detriment. His advice
was taken, he was proved correct, and Belmont’s engineer submitted a
report that was favorable.

On the south bank of the Canal, in Bourne, is a replica of the trading
post, “Aptucxet”, which rests on the very foundation stones that were
laid in 1627. Here the first business between New York and Eastern
Massachusetts was carried on by the Pilgrims who then were intent upon
getting money together to settle with their backers in London who had
financed their voyage to the New World.

Meanwhile, Governor Bradford was observing the Indians paddle their
canoes up Manomet River, then portage them over a stretch of land to
Scusset Creek and finally navigate on into Cape Cod Bay. It caused him
to think of the advantage of having a Cape Cod Canal.




SANDWICH----

    _Joe Jefferson Described It As
   “The Handsomest Town Out of
   England”_


Joseph Jefferson, great actor of his time, called Sandwich, Cape Cod,
“the handsomest town out of England.” And even today it is interesting
to note that Sandwich--the first town settled on Cape Cod--imparts more
of the nostalgic feeling than any other community on the Cape.

Massive trees shade her quiet streets, with their beautiful old homes,
and the stranger is conscious of a serenity that places her apart from
the modern world. But, Sandwich, founded in 1637 and with a present
population of less than 2,000 has much to talk about.

The ancestry of President Franklin D. Roosevelt is traced to the
historic Freeman Farm, at a junction on Route 28. Alvin Page Johnson
of Swampscott, Mass., an accredited genealogist, definitely connects
the President with Cape Cod ancestry and beyond to John Howland, a
Mayflower passenger. Edmond Freeman was among the ten men who came
from Saugus and settled Sandwich. He, according to data discovered by
this genealogist in 1934, was found to be one of the early American
ancestors of our President. Back of the Freeman Farm are boulders with
bronze tablets marking the graves of Edmond and his wife, Elizabeth.


DANIEL WEBSTER’S HAVEN

“Rip Van Winkle” lies in another Sandwich grave. Joe Jefferson
had a strong desire to live in Sandwich. Both he and his friend,
President Grover Cleveland, negotiated to buy houses there, but were
unsuccessful. Historians drop the hint that this might have been
because the righteous Puritans of the community did not want an actor
in their midst. At any rate it is recorded on good authority that
Jefferson remarked to a friend: “They wouldn’t let me live in Sandwich,
but they can’t prevent my burial there.”

Daniel Webster, great statesman, spent some of his pleasantest hours
on annual fishing and hunting excursions to the streams and marshes of
Sandwich. Daniel Webster Inn, the first stagecoach stop for Cape Cod
travellers of yore, and still providing food and good cheer, was named
for him. Webster put up there. He drank his rum straight and when he
was not engaged in camaraderie with the townsmen in the inn’s quaint
little taproom, the jug was delivered by a lift direct to his room.

Millions of American kiddies of this and past generations can feel
indebted to Sandwich, for here, also, is the birthplace of one of their
favorite authors. Thornton W. Burgess was born in Sandwich in 1874
and here he discovered the beloved little characters of his animal
kingdom, whose adventures he put into print and which have lulled many
a child into slumberland. Thornton Burgess had to put a little boy of
his own to bed after his wife’s death, and that’s how he first began
discovering his delightful little characters of the woods and fields.

The great meat packing industry, Swift and Company of Chicago, stemmed
from the brain and tireless toil of Gustavus Franklin Swift, who was
born in Sandwich in 1839. Gustavus’ ambitions came to light in early
boyhood when he bought hens from his grandfather at 40 cents each, then
sold each hen at a profit. At 16 he bought a heifer, slaughtered it
and peddled the meat. At his death Swift and Company was capitalized
at $25,000,000. Building the foundation for the business on Cape Cod,
Gustavus would drive pigs through the streets of Hyannis, aided by a
well-trained Collie dog. A housewife would come to the door, single
out the porker she wanted, and the dog and master would then thread
through the procession and work together to corner the pig until
the transaction was completed. The Swift family moved to Barnstable
in 1861. Tools used on Cape Cod in the beginning of the great meat
business were collected in Barnstable some years ago and now form a
prized collection at the Swift plant in Chicago.


FAME OF SANDWICH GLASS

Sandwich, herself, was in the big industry bracket. Indeed, the
products of the Boston & Sandwich Glass Company have given the
community national fame, and this fame lives on today. Sandwich
glass, by virtue of design and distinctive colorings, is prized by
collectors all over the country. Here the largest glass-works in the
country flourished in 1850, with 500 master-craftsmen and a weekly
output of 100,000 pounds. There is the legend that the first skilled
glass blowers were from England and were smuggled into this country in
barrels at a time when they were forbidden to enter this country. The
famous plant is in ruins now. It closed down after a strike in 1888,
though, at that time, machine-made glassware, turned out in Pittsburgh
and Chicago, was entering into competition with the wares fashioned by
the original Sandwich artificers.

Humor and curious laws and prejudices lighten the pages of Sandwich
history. A story that always gets a chuckle is that of “Seth the
Peddler” who, in 1669, was ordered out of town “lest he might become
a public charge.” Seth Pope shook the dust of Sandwich, but before he
left he announced he would be back and he would “buy up the town.”
Which is exactly what he did. Thirty years after making his bitter
departure, Seth, no longer the humble peddler, strode back into
Sandwich and proceeded to purchase nearly all the land in the town. He
built two houses and gave one each to his sons, Seth and John. Then
Seth Pope left Sandwich for good after letting it be generally known
“he would not live in the damn town.”

And, romancing was decidedly different in those olden days of Sandwich.
Richard Bourne, minister to the Mashpee Indians, lost his wife,
Bathsheba. Not long after, he wrote to a widow who was to be his second
wife: “I have had divers motions since I received yours, but none
suits me but yourself, if God soe incline your myndie to marry me ...
I doe not find in myselfe any flexableness to any other but an utter
loatheness.”




FALMOUTH----

    _The “Marrying Town” For
    New England’s Greatest
    Military Camp_


When New England’s greatest military camp was developed almost on
Falmouth’s doorstep, this very picturesque old community, with its rich
store of whaling lore and seafaring color, became the busiest and most
exciting center on all Cape Cod.

Falmouth has had a notable number of wartime marriages in the New
England area. Many and many a Camp Edwards soldier, before embarking
for foreign duty has been joined in wedlock. And, these young people
who made the most of a few fleeting hours have come from widespread
parts of the country.

The time factor also was precious in Falmouth romances of olden days.
There’s the story of the sailing-ship master of the last century. His
wedding plans were all arranged when he received orders to sail out
of New Bedford to Germany with a cargo of oil. A friend arranged to
have his beloved and the parson ready at the hour when the vessel would
arrive off Falmouth.

No time was lost. The skipper rowed ashore and sped to the new house
he had built for his bride. The ceremony was performed, he kissed his
bride farewell and an hour later was over the water again, resuming a
voyage to Bremen.


OUTSTANDING IN HISTORY

Falmouth is one of the most interesting places, historically, on the
Cape. The first house was built in 1685; the town meeting custom was
established in 1686; the first church was erected in 1796. The Village
Green, most attractive feature of the town, is linked with the colorful
course of Falmouth history.

Opposite the Green is the old meeting house; in its spire is a bell
cast by Paul Revere. An inscription reads: “The living to the church
I call; And to the grave I summon all.” A faded receipt is in a local
bank, bearing the date 1796 and giving the purchase price as $338.94.
The Green had its whipping post. Not many years ago the top of the post
was found in the attic of a house facing the Green and was removed to
the Public Library to go on exhibition.

Outstanding in Falmouth’s story is her rich fund of whaling lore. The
Town’s Museum has a generous assortment of articles reflecting the
great activity in this line: navigation instruments, revolvers used to
put down mutinies, logbooks, handcuffs, harpoon and many ship pictures.

Elijah Swift, who began as a carpenter, is rated the most useful
citizen in Falmouth history and he is credited with first bringing
prosperity to the town. Elijah Swift knew wood, hence his services
were highly valued when he was engaged to supply live oak for the
shipbuilding program of the American Navy after the War of 1812. He
recruited a large number of Falmouth men to go South on the live oak
operation and, incidentally, he was successful in fighting the dreaded
“yellow jack” disease in the swamp country. This business was destined
to run into the millions.


INTERESTING PERSONALITIES

A living reminder of Elijah Swift’s works are the beautiful, tall trees
surrounding the Village Green. He was permitted by the town, in 1832,
to plant, at his own expense, the saplings that developed into these
giants. The first summer after the planting was unusually dry. Elijah
Swift hired a man to carry water daily from Shiverick’s Pond to keep
life in the saplings, and this loving care he gave at the outset makes
this scene today “a glory to the community.”

Falmouth has had, and still has, many people who have done distinctive
work in their lifetime. Katherine Lee Bates, who wrote “America, the
Beautiful,” was Falmouth-born. Edward Herbert Thompson, great American
archaeologist, who did some of the most important work of bringing to
light the facts of ancient American life and culture, was a Falmouth
native.

Coonamessett Ranch, in the township of Falmouth, is said to be the
largest ranch east of the Mississippi. Charles R. Crane of Chicago
started cultivating it in 1915, to demonstrate the agricultural
possibilities of Cape Cod. But he had an idealistic aim that was
thwarted by the outbreak of the last war. The great acres were to have
been settled by carefully selected families of the Russian peasantry,
and the owner was intent upon carrying through his ideas for developing
the possibilities of the less fortunate Russian folk.




MASHPEE----

    _Where the Wampanoag
    Indian Tongue is Still
    Chanted_


Mrs. Dorcas Gardner, of Wampanoag Indian descent, sits in a low-ceiling
little room mellowed from many years of simple living, and she speaks
with the wisdom of her 74 years.

“Why? I come up against the word Why so often I have to let it go by.
The Lord knows best. It should be a better world after this war. When
you go to the lowest, there must be an uplift somehow. We’ve seen so
much of the bad we’re bound to have some good come out of it.”

Mashpee (originally Massapee) is steeped in Indian lore. Here is Cape
Cod’s smallest town. It has a population of 405. George Perlot proudly
points to the town’s remarkable service record.

From the tent days Camp Edwards has had close ties with little Mashpee.
Indeed, 90 per cent of its airport is on Mashpee land. But this
historic settlement has always had more than a local reputation, as far
back as 1658 when Richard Bourne began his evangelistic work among the
Indians. Mashpee election returns are watched for and featured in the
city newspapers, because they are the first to be announced in every
State or Federal polling.


OLDEST CAPE COD CHURCH

The Indian Church, oldest house of worship on Cape Cod, is a rare
landmark; likewise the Indian burial ground, whose oldest gravestone
marks the resting place of Chief Popmonnett, who died in 1770 at the
age of 51. The fame of historic Hotel Attaquin, a whaling skipper’s
enterprise, is such that someone, in 1910, filched the register which
bore the signatures of Daniel Webster, Joseph Jefferson, Charles Dana
Gibson, Grover Cleveland, John Drew and Finley Peter Dunne.

Two men survive in Mashpee who still speak the Wampanoag
tongue--Ambrose Pells and William James. One or the other intones the
primitive language over the grave when a Mashpee resident of Indian
descent is given to the earth.

In 1711, the Rev. Daniel Williams of London left a fund in charge of
Harvard University for the religious education of Indians. Mashpee
became the beneficiary of this largesse. Richard Bourne taught the
Indians here to govern themselves; they were authorized to hold their
own courts, try criminals and pass judgment. Further, Bourne caused a
law to be invoked whereby “No land could be bought by or sold to any
white person without the consent of all the Indians, not even with the
consent of the General Court.”

A Provincetown preacher, one Mr. Stone, appeared before the Mashpees
long ago and, in his sermon, laid particular stress on the evils of
alcohol. One of the Indians was asked how he liked the sermon. He
answered:

“Mr. Stone is one very good preacher, but he preach too much about rum.
Indian think nothing about it; but when he tells how Indian love rum,
and how much they drink, then I think how good it is, and think no more
’bout the sermon, my mouth waters all the time so much for rum.”


ANCIENT RITES RE-ENACTED

Another in the line of preachers who occupied the Indian Church pulpit
was Rev. Phineas Fish of Sandwich. He annoyed his early American
parishioners, because, while accepting a salary, he held church for the
whites and discouraged attendance by the Indians. At a meeting of the
elders some strong sentiments were expressed and ultimately Mr. Fish
was forcibly ejected, after which “the lock on the door of the chapel
was changed.”

Mrs. Gardner many years ago originated the Richard Bourne Day ceremony,
in celebration of the ordination of the pioneer missionary. In August
of each year the colorful pageantry of braves in their great feather
head-dresses, their squaws with beaded buckskins, tom-toms, tepees and
even papooses was witnessed at the Indian Church. The Indians came
from Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts and other parts. Their
ancient rites were re-enacted and they exchanged reminiscenses of their
family lines, while large crowds of white visitors looked on and let
their imaginations roll backward. The war came and the curtain was
drawn--for the duration, at least--on this picturesque ceremony at the
257-year-old Indian Church in Mashpee.




BARNSTABLE----

   _Revival Of A Great Cape Cod
   Tradition Is Taking Place
   In Hyannis Village_


In olden days New England’s great clipper ships had a world reputation.
Fortunes of the American merchant marine were at the crest in the
1850’s, when, also, Cape Cod’s memorable pageant of clippers and
stalwart shipmasters were in full lustre--notably, the famous Red
Jacket, which made the record crossing of the Atlantic on her maiden
voyage in 13 days and one hour.

Today the spirit of this great tradition is revived here with a new,
even more widespread, sort of drama. The historic Massachusetts
Maritime Academy has established a “permanent shore base” at Hyannis,
Cape Cod, to school officers for wartime duty in our merchant marine
and Navy and--after the war--to train young men for technical jobs at
sea or ashore.

This is definitely the most newsworthy and promising wartime
development in Cape Cod affairs.


OLD SEAFARER GIVES ADVICE

The 100th class of this old school which had its beginning in the era
of wooden ships and iron men was graduated in 1944 with colorful and
impressive ceremonies. A full dress drill by a battalion of midshipmen
on the Academy parade grounds provided a stirring scene for some 500
fathers and mothers and relatives. The graduating class was the largest
in the 51 years of the institution. Governor Saltonstall, Rear Admiral
Robert A. Theobald, U.S.N., Commandant of First Naval District, and
other notables bid Godspeed and counselled the new officers who were to
join Academy comrades scattered over the world in all theatres of the
war.

Particularly interesting was the meaty advice Admiral Theobald offered
the new officers out of his own 40-odd years of seafaring experience.
He said:

“You’re going to have to spend endless days and months in the sameness
of only a cloudless sky above you and a smooth sea beneath you.
Don’t get in a seagoing rut. Get an avocation as soon as you can. I
would suggest that you develop the habit of doing heavy reading on
international relations. Your nation is in the middle of world politics
now and will never recede again from world relationships.”

“We, as a nation, have been too prone to accept the notion that other
nations have the same psychological reactions as ours. You will find it
a very interesting avocation to get books and study other people of the
world. You must go back to find out what makes them tick. And, also,
this reading will enable you to determine whether your own statesmen
are doing a good job.”

He made a point of impressing the graduates that a man in war never
gets over fear. In a crisis of danger they would be afraid the first
time, and the hundredth time, although each time they would learn more
of what to expect.


GOVERNOR SEES FUTURE

Governor Saltonstall spoke of America’s plans for a great merchant
marine fleet, and said, “I congratulate you on the opportunities that
lie ahead of you.”

Capt. Walter K. Queen, U.S.N.R., Ret., chairman of the Academy’s board
of commissioners, announced that the total number of Massachusetts
lads trained for officer duty since the Academy was founded now was
2,277. In keeping with a long-time custom, the Boston Marine Society,
established in 1742 and the oldest marine society in the world,
presented its prize to Vincent Francis Leahy of Brookline as “the
graduate excelling in those qualities making for the best shipmaster.”
Prizes were presented also to other outstanding students by the Society
of the War of 1812 and the Massachusetts State Society.

Cape Cod, pioneered by men of the sea, is an appropriate setting for a
modern school of shipmasters. The future looks extremely promising and
the Academy, hardly established on the new site, is steadily expanding.
Its erstwhile students are in the thick of action in this war, and many
of them saw the worst of it while “delivering the goods” to Murmansk.
Some have been killed, some wounded and some decorated for valor.

Cape Cod and New England at large will hear much about the
Massachusetts Maritime Academy as time goes on, for the signs point to
increasing heights of achievement by the American merchant marine after
peace is won.

Capt. Claude O. Bassett, U.S.N.R., is the Academy superintendent. A
mild and good-humored veteran and thoroughly schooled and seasoned in
the profession of the sea.




YARMOUTHPORT----

    _Ichabod Paddock, Whaling
    Instructor--and “Wes” Baker,
    Guadalcanal Hero_


Tom Baker is mail carrier for the Yarmouthport, Cape Cod, postoffice.
An elderly man, wiry, with quick-moving gait, he makes his appointed
rounds in fair weather and foul. A younger man who held the job is in a
war plant.

When Guadalcanal was taken, Tom Baker’s son--19-year-old Pvt. 1st Cl.
Thomas Wesley Baker--raced up the beach in the first invading wave of
Marines.

I talked with him when he came home--an invalid, with jungle malaria in
his system. His Guadalcanal experience had cost him 40 pounds.

It was 3 o’clock in the morning when the Japs advanced up the beach.
Wes Baker was taut and scared, because this was to be his first
experience in actual combat.... “We saw them first. They came in
columns of four. The highest ranking officers were right out in front.
Later, we found that none of the Japs was less than corporal and in
their clothing was a lot of American and English money. They were
picked troops and the biggest Japs I ever saw, all of them close to
six feet tall. They came through a little lagoon, waist high in water.
There wasn’t any barbed wire up, so they kept coming on. They were no
more than 200 yards away when we opened fire. There were 1500 of them
and they were all killed. We lost 29 and 80 were wounded. We’d charge
and they’d go into the water, trying to swim out of range. We picked
them off like ducks. When their officers were killed, they didn’t know
what they were doing.”


HOME FRONT CHARM

More advanced in years than mail carrier Tom Baker are Miss Saidee M.
Swift and her sister, Mrs. Caroline Burr, of the Home Front. They are
in the candy-making business.

A large and pleasant old house stands at the bend of the road just as
you enter upon the beautiful vista of great elms in Yarmouthport. A
weather-worn sign--Saidee Swift’s Candies--is on a tree out in front.
For 20 years Saidee Swift has turned out fine candies and travellers
from all parts of the nation have knocked at her door. Her chocolates
have gone to China. Governor Saltonstall is one of her best customers.
Her trade has included judges, society folk, artists, writers and
countless prominent individuals who have visited the Cape. Each
Christmas she makes about 200 pounds of candy for faithful customers in
distant parts.

Saidee Swift’s technique includes a close watch on the weather and
sometimes she waits four or five days for just the right temperature.
She says, “In a northeast storm, I can dip splendidly.”

Whaling captains lived in the great houses facing the Yarmouthport
elms. In 1691, Ichabod Paddock was engaged to go to Nantucket to
instruct men “in the art of killing whales by the employment of boats
from the shore.” Not far from Saidee Swift’s is the former domicile of
Asa Eldredge, commander of the famous clipper Red Jacket, who made a
record voyage from New York to Liverpool in 13 days.

Regular packet service to Boston contributed to the naming of
Yarmouthport. There is still an old timer or two who can recall the
fierce competition between the Yarmouthport and Barnstable sailing
packets and the frequent races to Boston.


WOMEN MOULDED BULLETS

Yarmouthport is a part of the township of Yarmouth, which is
considerably spread out, from shore to shore, across the Cape. Not so
many years ago some stray bullets were found under the bricks of the
hearthstone of an old house that was being demolished. The find was
reminiscent of the story of Joshua Gray and his fellow soldiers of
Yarmouth. Joshua Gray was captain of the early Yarmouth Militia and an
officer in the Revolution, who marched with his men to help Washington
defend Dorchester Heights. The night before their departure, women of
the town worked in his home until sunrise moulding bullets for the
soldiers.

In great grandfather’s time Yarmouthport was the trading center in
this section of the Cape, and people came over from Hyannis to do
their shopping. Tom Baker’s mail delivery job was first held by John
Thacher, who rode horseback and made his rounds once a week. His pay
was $1 a day, and some citizens considered this an extravagance. Total
postoffice receipts in the town of Yarmouthport for the year 1795
amounted to $26.

The first daily newspaper on Cape Cod was founded in 1893 in
Yarmouthport. George Otis operated the _Cape Cod Item_. On the
same site the _Yarmouth Register_, weekly newspaper, continues to
record the local life, as it did 108 years ago.




DENNIS----

    _The “Smoky Gold” Craft Thrived
    When America Was Young_


The “smoky gold” story of Cape Cod gives a rare picture of the
pioneering spirit and richness of America’s founding days.

Smoky gold was the local name for lampblack, an indispensable base for
paints and printer’s ink in the olden days. The little town of Dennis,
once a great clipper ship port, was known in those days as one of the
world’s greatest sources of lampblack and her precious shipments were
in demand in England and on the Continent.

A modern summer visitor, the Rev. Ernest G. N. Holmes of Bethlehem,
Pa., brought the story of the great Cape Cod industry to light. While
clearing a Dennis farm he had bought for a summer home, the clergyman
discovered a stone arch two or three feet above the ground; adjoining
it was a stone floor and around its edges the soil was as black as
night--a very unusual color for Cape Cod earth.


AN INGENIOUS OPERATION

Subsequent investigation revealed that this was the remnant of a
lampblack manufactory, known to the old timers as a Funn. Today this
section of Dennis is called Funntown. The Funn was a lamp chimney
on Gargantuan lines. Anyone who has used a kerosene lamp knows how
annoying it was to have the lamp smoke and smudge the glass. The Funn,
however, was erected for just that purpose, only there was no glass
and the lampblack formed on the ceiling of the Funn thick enough to be
scraped off in layers. Thus, smoky gold was produced.

The relic was found knee-high above the ground, but when the Funn was
in working order it stood 18 feet above the ground and over a circular
area 20 feet in diameter. It was of stone and brick construction, the
top like a great inverted cone. There was an opening on each side. The
winds were important to the industry. So, the Funns were always built
in pairs, the hearth of one facing due east and the other due north.
The prevailing wind on Cape Cod is southwest. The idea was to keep the
smoke from escaping outside the Funn.

The smoke first came from fires of pine knots gathered in the
surrounding woods. Next, after this supply was cut down, resin was
sailed to Dennis from the Carolinas and Virginia. A fuel problem
arose when, in 1860, a Civil War blockade cut off this supply. The
Funn operators then looked to the coal regions of the Pennsylvania
mountains; naphtha, a by-product, was shipped in and this was used up
to the last days when the Funns operated.


OXEN CARTED SMOKY GOLD

After the fire was quenched, a man would enter the Funn with a 12-foot
pole and a board at the end, somewhat like a hoe. For protection
against the showering soot he wore a straw hat with a brim that went
beyond his shoulders, and with his long scraper he would reap the heavy
coatings of smoky gold. It would be poured into boxes, then taken to an
adjacent packing shed, where the boxes would be sealed for shipment.
Oxen then would cart the smoky gold to the East Dennis shore, where
crews of the clipper ships that sailed the seven seas put in. It would
go to Boston by sail, a trip of 10 to 11 hours if the wind was good.
On the oldtime Boston docks Cape Cod lampblack would join the company
of spices and silks from India, the teas from China, Java’s coffee and
sugar from the West Indies and become a part of the adventurous world
commerce of the clipper days.

“Time moves on to ever new discoveries,” wrote Edna Cornell, telling
the story of smoky gold in a bulletin of The Society for the
Preservation of New England Antiquities. “The wonder of yesterday is
the forgotten glory of today. The Funns were new and amazing a century
ago; but industry, always in a hurry, outstripped them long ago, and
they are now only a few scattered bricks, a few garden walks and a
fireplace. Nevertheless, like all big and influential things, no matter
of what antiquity or deep obliteration, they have left a footprint
behind them that time has not yet erased nor witchgrass on a Cape Cod
farm completely hidden.”




DENNIS----

    _“Sleepy John” Sears’
    $2,000,000 Idea_


Some remembrances of an old Cape Codder:

“Salt works! Yes, I have seen many of them. There were rows and rows
of them on my grandfather’s farm. And my grandmother! Well, she wore
herself out taking care of them. She had only 14 children. Generally
three of them were in arms. Many a time when grandfather and the boys
were at the flats (the shore) and a rainstorm came up, grandmother
would walk half a mile, carrying one child, leading another, and the
three-year-old toddling behind--to the salt works to cover them before
the rain came on. Rain freshened the salt, you know.”

Salt-making by the solar evaporation process was developed into a
$2,000,000 business on Cape Cod in the early 1800’s, according to
one estimate. Today, in an age when the Cape lives on the summer
vacationist trade and Camp Edwards revenue, you rarely hear a mention
of this once great, now extinct, industry. The originator was a
retired skipper who had ideas and ever a weather eye for an extra
dollar--Capt. John (“Sleepy John”) Sears of Dennis.


CAPE COD STICKTOITIVNESS

People thought him whacky when they first learned he was trying to make
money from the sun and the salt water all around him. But, Sleepy John
(an ill-chosen sobriquet, if there ever was one) had the last laugh and
rolled up a nice fortune meanwhile when he demonstrated that it is not
only a good idea to have ideas but, also, to carry them through. For,
salt was a lot more important in his era; it was needed then as now to
go with ones’ vittles, though the greatest value was its indispensable
use in the curing of fish.

Dubbed “Sears Folly”, the first salt-making plant got off to a merry
start in 1776. Skipper Sears built a vat, or “water room”, that was a
crude affair, 100 feet long, 10 feet wide. There were shutters over
the top so that the vat containing salt water could be covered when
it rained, or exposed to the full rays of the sun. As the hot sun
poured down on the water, salt began to crystallize and the Dennis
idea man must have danced a ’76 jitter jig, conjuring up pictures
of what he would do with all his wealth, amassed from just a simple
contraption and no expense whatever. At the end of the sunny season,
however, Captain Sears had produced only eight bushels of salt, and the
neighbors were laughing louder.

The old sea dog wasn’t in the habit of quitting when the going got
rough. Having discovered that production was held down by leaks in the
vat, he persevered and found a way to make the vat tight as a drum. The
second year he crystallized 30 bushels of salt. But, a labor problem
was slowing his progress. The salt water had to be poured into the vat
from buckets, a tedious and time-consuming handicap, for John soon
learned that for every 350 gallons of water he poured only one bushel
of salt formed. He kept plugging and, meanwhile, he was doing some tall
scheming. The neighbors were still laughing.


FINALE OF A GREAT INDUSTRY

On the fourth year Sears Folly was improved with a pump worked by hand.
Production was stepped up. The pump continued in use until 1785, then,
at a suggestion of Capt. Nathaniel Freeman, John Sears, with the help
of others, contrived a pump worked by wind. This really turned the
trick and set the skipper off full sail to become the local Croesus.

Salt sold at $8 a bushel ($8 was $8 in those times) and the bushels
piled higher and higher at the Sears works. By this time the neighbors
had gotten sober and interested and other salt-making windmills were
erected and their creaking and whirring were familiar sounds throughout
the village. The men who assisted John Sears with his windmill
improvement eventually reassigned to him their right and title and
finally the founder of the salt industry obtained a Government patent.

The production of salt spread in other parts of the Cape, notably
Provincetown, a great fishing port and, earlier, a whaler’s haven.
Salt-making began there in 1800; in 1837 the tip of the Cape had 78
salt works, each employing two men and producing a total of 48,960
bushels of salt. The manufacturing developed even to a higher plan when
Glauber Salts, made from boiling brine, was valued by physicians and
came into brisk demand.

Development of the salt springs of New York, and manufacturing
improvements and cheaper operating costs elsewhere, marked the
beginning of the end of Cape Cod’s great salt industry.




BREWSTER----

    _Thanks to Pioneering Here,
    Millions of American Soldiers
    Wear Good Shoes_


Quiet little Brewster, Cape Cod, offers a rich tapestry of Americana.

Many a U. S. soldier slogging over the world battlefronts is wearing
brogans turned out by patented machines of the great United Shoe
Machinery--which started from a one-man cobbling business in oldtime
Brewster.

West Brewster, dubbed “Factory Village” by the old timers, was a
bustling scene, with spinning, fulling and grist mills, tannery and
iron works, and the still-present Flax Pond, where flax gathered in
surrounding fields was put to soak in the water-retting process of
making linen.

The sheep growers would trek here, over the fields and ragged roads,
with their bags of wool. The going was hard on their footwear, it was
noted by the Winslow brothers, one of whom operated a fulling mill
and the other, a grist mill. So, to maintain good will, the fulling
mill Winslow verged into a sideline of cobbling the shoes of his wool
producers.

But, a teen-age son--who gave the lie to common gossip of that day,
that the younger generation was swiftly going to the dogs--was actually
the one who transformed the humble cobbler’s tapping into a nationwide
whirr and, incidentally, founded the Great Winslow fortune of today.


A CROSS-ROADS GENIUS

The lad was uncommonly ingenious and tenacious. Recruited by the
fulling mill operator to assist in the cobbling work, the boy grew
impatient at the tediousness of the task. He conceived a time-saving
and labor-saving machine. Then he dreamed up another and another. He
wrote to Washington and obtained a patent on each new invention as fast
as it took shape.

These same patents are in use today in the big shoe plants of America,
and the earnings from them continue to flow handsomely to the present
Winslow heirs. Thus, the mighty United Shoe Machinery Company got its
first breath of life on old Cape Cod.

Brewster is named for Elder William Brewster, a crusader for religious
freedom, who sailed to Cape Cod on the Mayflower and acted as pastor to
the church at Plymouth. He is described as having been “tender harted,
and compassionate of such as were in miserie.” Further, “none did more
offend him and displease him than such as would haughtily and proudly
carry and lift up themselves, being rise from nothing, and haveing
little els in them to comend them but a few fine cloaths, or a little
riches more than others.” On his death, we are told, Elder Brewster’s
complete estate consisted of 275 books, of which 64 were “in the
learned languages.”

Quaint names are associated with Cape Cod lore. Fear Brewster was one
of Elder Brewster’s daughters and he had sons named Love Brewster and
Wrestling Brewster.


SEA ADVENTURES OF OLD

When Brewster town history is recounted there is always talk of the
colorful seafaring oldsters and their great sailing craft. Outstanding
is the Pitcairn Island story. Captain William Freeman of Brewster
landed at the bleak hiding place of the Bounty mutineers in 1883,
and brought his daughter Clara along with him. Clara cultivated the
friendship with Rosa Young, daughter of Edward Young, who survived the
hardships and bloody conflict among the mutineers after they found
refuge on the island in 1790. Later, they corresponded. Today, in the
Brewster Public Library, there is the original manuscript of Rosa
Young’s letters, extending over a period of six months.

In one of these letters, Rosa tells of her meeting with the chaplain
of the man-of-war Constance, who landed at Pitcairn. All descendents
of the mutineers, including Rosa, were intensely religious. Thus, she
described the visiting chaplain to her Brewster friend: “Whether he
experienced the same feeling that I did I cannot tell, but I certainly
thought that a more un-chaplain-looking man was hard to find, and if
words and manner are an index to a man’s character, he certainly did
not seem rightly fitted for a sacred office.” And then, as though to
show how shocked she was, Rosa Young concluded, “as we were about to
leave ship he said, ‘Now, we will have to sing, _The Girl I Left
Behind Me._’”

The house in Brewster where Joseph C. Lincoln, writer of Cape Cod
character stories, was born still bears a For Sale sign. Conrad Aiken,
noted American poet, has a Summer place in a tranquil spot in the hill
country. Chester Slack, an artist of reputation, lives there year-round
and takes a sympathetic interest in local affairs. In recent times
a Brewster craftsman, with a resourceful spirit reminiscent of the
Factory Village pioneers, has been weaving fine tweeds to fill
individual orders.

Brewster today reflects mostly upon her memory-book, for there is
no longer any of the teeming industry of the Winslow founders. The
exciting spring herring run annually draws attention to the town.
Brewster has one vestige of the hallowed past that is distinctive:
It is the site of the only water-power grist mill on Cape Cod where
countless modern summer visitors have watched the ancient process of
grinding corn--and captured a bit of stirring reality of the vigorous
Founding Days of our nation.




HARWICH----

    _A Liberator of Slaves, Immortalized
    by the Poet Whittier_


“The boys all want the town paper. It’s like getting a letter from
home, they write.”

Harry Albro, friendly and kind country editor, gives particular
attention to his servicemen’s mailing list. He served under MacArthur
in the last war, was gassed at Argonne and came back with six battle
stars. He has held the post of a State Guard commanding officer and has
had other Home Front duties. His homey weekly newspapers mean a lot to
people in war service now far removed from their beloved Cape Cod.

When the Revolutionary War clouds loomed, Ebenezer Weekes of Harwich
said to his son, “Eben you are the only one that can be spared; take
your gun and go; fight for religion and liberty!”


“HARRICH” IN ENGLAND, “HAR-WICH” HERE

“Harrich” is the way it is mouthed in the seaport town of Essex County,
England. The Harwich of Cape Cod is pronounced Har-wich. This Harwich
was founded in 1694 and it is said that one of her ardent townsmen,
Patrick Butler, walked all the way to Boston, a trek of 100 miles, to
obtain the incorporation.

In modern times Anthony Elmer Crowell of East Harwich achieved fame
as one of America’s great craftsmen. Mr. Crowell, remote from the
beaten path, admirably proved the better mousetrap adage. He carved and
painted images of birds so realistically that they came into demand
for museums and private collections and travelled even to Australia.
At first Mr. Crowell was a gunners’ guide, commissioned to fashion
some duck decoys that would be more convincing to Cape Cod ducks than
the wood-butcher jobs that other decoy-makers had sold the sportsmen.
Then the East Harwich genius branched into making robins, bluejays,
sanderlings and the many, many other species of the feathered tribes.

Word of his skill got around fast and he profited handsomely. His
quaint craft was put into Joseph C. Lincoln’s Cape Cod book, “Queer
Judson”. And, “It is not unlikely that a day may come when a ‘Crowell
bird’ will be as much sought as a genuine bit of Sandwich glass or a
slender piece of Sheraton furniture,” prophesies Arthur Wilson Tarbell
in “Cape Cod Ahoy!”

Religion was a strong point of Harwich’s early days. A variety of
fifteen denominations once functioned within the town’s borders and
at times emotions ran high. It is recorded, for example, that the
Rev. Edward Pell of Harwich left a request for his burial to be in
the North Precinct, or present-day Brewster, for, “if left among the
pines of the South Precinct (Harwich) he might be overlooked at the
resurrection, that the Lord would never think of looking in such an
un-Godly place for a righteous man.”


MAN WITH “THE BRANDED HAND”

In 1743 came the “Great Awakening” evangelical movement and with it
the all-out sects known as “New Lights” who “made the pine woods of
Harwich ring with Hallelujahs and hosannas, even from babes!” Moreover,
there was “a screeching and groaning all over, and it hath been very
powerful ever since.” Touching on activities of the New Lights, Henry
C. Kittridge, Cape Cod historian, narrates that “when under the spell
of their mania, they walked along the tops of fences instead of on the
sidewalks; affected a strange, springing gait, and conversed by singing
instead of ordinary speech, in the distressing manner of characters in
light operas.” Could it be that author Kittridge was spoofing us a bit?

A native of Harwich--recorded in history as the first liberator of
slaves--is eulogized in verse by Whittier. Capt. Jonathan Walker in
1844 put out from Pensacola with seven runaway slaves aboard his
vessel, having responded to their appeals to be taken to the British
West Indies, where they would find freedom under the Union Jack. The
Cape Cod skipper was captured, he was imprisoned in irons and thence
the brand, “S.S.” (slave stealer) was seared into his right hand.
Captain Walker is hailed by Whittier:

  “Hold it up before our sunshine, up against our Northern air;
  Ho! Men of Massachusetts, for the love of God, look there!
  Take it henceforth for your standard, like the Bruce’s heart of yore,
  In the dark strife closing round ye, let that hand be seen before.”

The culture of cranberries on Cape Cod--a source of revenue that runs
into the millions--was begun on a commercial scale in Harwich in 1845,
though it was Henry Hall of Dennis who was the pioneer grower in 1816.
Fishing was on the decline and a retired harvester of cod spoke the
sentiment of his salty brethren:

“I put up my chart and glass, and took to raising cranberry sass.”
Before then the cranberry was regarded as only food for the cranes.
Crane-berry was the original name the pioneers gave this famous Cape
Cod product.




CHATHAM----

    _The First American to Fly
    The Atlantic “Hopped Off” Here_


“You don’t say hum and eggs, do you?” chided the old native.

So, the proper pronunciation for the town of Chatham is--Chat-ham. With
the accent on the hind end. To the native this is important. And so it
is on the opposite side of the nation where the true citizen of San
Francisco winces when you say “Frisco” and would prefer to have you
articulate the whole name of his fair city.

Chatham, with some 50 miles of shoreline, is one of the most beautiful,
unspoiled seashore places on Cape Cod. Architecture of great seafaring
days, the primitive, lonely cry of the seagull, the home-spun shell
fisherman, a history crowded with drama, bright little Yankee streets,
art and literature and here and there a touch of international
fame--this is Chatham. The writer is prejudiced, because this is the
place where, 18 years ago, he spent his first night on Cape Cod. And
met his first artist acquaintance, a dear friend for two decades,
Harold Dunbar.


PEOPLE OF DISTINCTION

The late Joseph C. Lincoln was a widely known Chatham resident. The
writer of many fiction-novels about Cape Cod folk contributed more
than any other person to make this peninsula known to the nation at
large. Arthur Wilson Tarbell of Chatham, a modern historian, wrote
an outstanding book, “Cape Cod Ahoy!” Sinclair Lewis did some of his
early writing here. Alice Stallknecht Wight got on the Associated Press
wires as a result of the excitement caused by her mural painting in
the Chatham Congregational Church. “Christ Preaching to the Multitude”
is its title. The multitude consists of well known Chatham faces and
Christ, depicted as a fisherman, is shown addressing them from a boat.
For a companion piece Mrs. Wight later painted “The Last Supper”,
showing Coast Guards, sea captains and other Chathamites as the
disciples.

And in a pleasing, secluded spot the late Supreme Court Justice Louis
D. Brandeis had his summer home for many years.

The tiptop spire of the Congregational Church is fashioned from a
spar on the bark R. A. Allen, wrecked on the Chatham shore in 1887.
Lightning damaged the church in the same storm. And the Cape’s toy
windmill industry, that has waxed fat from the summer trade, started
in Chatham. The humble carver of the first shop is romanticized in
Lincoln’s novel “Shavings”. But a Coast Guard station skipper is given
credit for making the first toy windmill. The art spread to other
stations and business got so brisk the Government issued an order,
forbidding the guardians of the deep from engaging further in the
profitable sideline.


LINKED WITH OLD ENGLAND

Chatham is named for the County of Kent town in old England. Before the
Pilgrims came to the Cape, Champlain, the French explorer, arrived
here in 1606. He planned to establish a French colony in Chatham, but
a fight with the Indians drove him off. In 1658, William Nickerson of
Norfolk, England, appeared on the scene and gave the sachem Mattaquason
a shallop for the sea-girted acres. Complications developed; Nickerson
was called to Plymouth Court and ultimately he had to pay 90 pounds as
a fair purchase price. In 1712 Chatham was incorporated as a town.

The Mayflower, her passengers looking to a settlement below the Hudson,
barely escaped being wrecked on the Chatham shoals. Here she turned
back to enter Provincetown Harbor.

Three hundred years later a Navy flier repaid this visit, wafting down
from the heavens onto Plymouth, England.

Lieut. Albert Cushing Read of Hanson, Mass., was the first man to
fly the Atlantic, and he took off from Chatham. He competed in a
trans-ocean contest of the Navy “Nancies” in 1919, the N-C’s 1, 2, 3
and 4. The original takeoff point was Rockaway Beach, Long Island. Read
rode the N-C 4, which was disabled far off this shore, but managed
to get into this port, where, as luck had it, a Navy air station was
located for the training of large numbers of fliers for the last war.
A new motor was installed, the N-C 4 winged off to the Azores via
Trepassey Bay, New Foundland and the pioneering flight was completed
with fifty-two and a half hours having been spent in the skies. Read
flew on to Plymouth, perhaps for sentiment’s sake, having the Mayflower
in mind.




ORLEANS----

    _The World’s Insomnia
    Champion Lived Here_


The late Joseph C. Lincoln of Chatham gained national fame with his
stories of Cape Cod. The quaint characters he wrote about were, for the
most part, taken from life. Some other old-timers, however, have been a
bit too unconventional, even for Mr. Lincoln’s yarn-spinning purposes.
“Bill-Ike” Small, for example.

Bill-Ike--or, Isaac Wilbur Small, a name that no one would have
recognized--claimed he never slept. He was the insomnia champion of
the world until he passed on in Orleans a few years ago. And, he made
it so real a Boston paper printed pages about him. The paper sent down
its crack feature writer and he and Bill-Ike went off to New York to
tour the night clubs--the idea being to determine whether Bill-Ike’s
story would stand the test during two or three night of skylarking and
sitting up in a hotel room.

Bill-Ike made good, we were told, for the newspaperman observed him
every blessed minute of the sleeplessness, nor did he, himself, fall
off a chair.


HE GAINED WEIGHT, TOO

“I close my eyes for a little while, just to rest ’em, but I don’t
sleep. I haven’t used a bed for over five years,” Bill-Ike would tell
me. Then the gentle old man with a flowing white beard would add that
he had gained 38 pounds in the past year.

He would just “set” in a decrepit old chair by the stove or putter
about the house long winter nights. He’d while away the tedious hours
reading sea stories and cowboy yarns and go through three or four
magazines in a night. But, his mother’s glasses didn’t serve him as
well toward the end and time became more of a burden. Around 3 a.m. he
would brew a pot of tea and make himself a sandwich. Moonlight nights
in the spring and summer were welcomed, for then he was able to get
outdoors and do a few chores.

Bill-Ike said he first discovered the capacity to go without sleep when
he was a youth working in the cranberry bogs during a rush season. He
worked night and day for three months that time and discovered that
he could get along with only an hour’s snooze in the morning before
breakfast. But, he didn’t really begin to make a habit of staying awake
until 1928.


HOW HE “EXPERIMENTED”

That year Bill-Ike happened to read in a magazine, “Nobody can go 80
days without sleep.” Just to prove this wasn’t so, the old gentleman
began by denying himself sleep for a continuous stretch of 83 days.
In 1929 he “experimented” again, keeping awake 147 days. Then the
sleeplessness became more of a habit. But, each year he bettered his
own record and in 1933 he rounded out his first full year of going
without sleep. Finally, Bill-Ike achieved the amazing five-year record,
and he was going into his sixth year when he passed on.

He was in fine fettle almost to the end, a firm believer in the gospel
of hard toil. During vacation seasons he kept busy tending the gardens
and being the handyman for summer cottagers. A bachelor--“always
been willin’ but the right gal ain’t ever showed up”--Bill-Ike lived
with his brother, Fred, in a century-old house in a spot remote from
the town. Fred would have his regular eight or nine hours in bed,
undisturbed by Bill-Ike’s poking about the house at all hours of the
night.

“Sure, I could enjoy a full night’s sleep,” was the old insomnia
champion’s mournful comment. “But, I just can’t, that’s all. Doctors
say it has something to do with my nerves.”

There were people in Orleans who took Bill-Ike’s sleepless story with
a pinch of salt. But Bill-Ike got the publicity just the same, and the
New York excursion and ballyhoo didn’t change him a bit. And, at the
peak of the newspaper excitement, another oldster of the community
bobbed up with a new and original claim. He slept, all right, but his
eyelids never seemed to come down. All of his sleeping was done with
eyes wide open. He just lay on his back, staring up at the ceiling, all
night long.




ORLEANS----

    _The First German U-Boat
    Attack On American Soil_


In the last war, the one and only attack on American soil by the
Germans was at Orleans, Cape Cod.

On a quiet Sunday morning, July 21, 1918, the submarine, U-156, rose
from the ocean waters a few hundred yards off the Orleans shore. In
full view of numerous cottagers, the enemy sub leisurely began shelling
the defenseless tug Perth Amboy and her three barges.

Exactly why these craft, of no particular military value, were chosen
for attack has never been made known. It may have been an impulsive act
of bravado by the Kaiser’s marauders or, possibly, a scare stunt to
give Americans at home the jitters.

The Americans attacked, managed to get ashore in dories, while
the firing continued. “One observer counted 147 shots.” There
are conflicting versions, naturally, but it is agreed there was
considerable shooting, and the U-boat operated throughout without
meeting resistance.


FIRED ON COAST GUARD

At least one shot was aimed directly at the tower of a Coast Guard
station. It missed by a small margin and landed in a marsh, according
to the description given me by a former Coast Guardsman who was
standing the tower watch at the time. The three barges were sunk. The
Perth Amboy, while badly burned, was subsequently towed in for repairs,
and she may even be in service today.

A Cape Cod man, strange as it may seem, was skipper of the Perth
Amboy--Capt. Joe Perry hailed from Provincetown. Another Provincetown
man, Henry J. James, son of a fishing captain in that old port at the
tip-end of the Cape, was moved to write a significant book after the
Orleans attack.

Of interest even today, this book--“German Subs in Yankee Waters”--came
out not long before Pearl Harbor, though James (when I last heard from
him he was superintendent of schools in Simsbury, Connecticut) had
negotiated with publishers for a long time to get it into print.

Many American developments for defense in the present war coincide
with suggestions made by James--small, fast boats for coastal defense,
beam-trawlers for minesweeping, the registering of all small craft for
coastal protection and other aids lacking in the last war.

The Cape Cod attack and its implications made a strong impression upon
James in his youth; this spurred him on to devote many years of patient
research to complete his book.

He relates that in 1918, during the final action of the last war,
Germany had six U-boats operating in our waters and these alone sank 91
ships and took a toll of 368 lives. All this happened within a brief
six months.

These half-dozen underseas boats operating along the Atlantic
shore--3400 miles from their base at Kiel, Germany--all got away
safely after their destructive work. All but one--this struck a mine in
the North Sea, not far from Kiel--got back to the home base.


STRANGE MEETING AT SEA

A complete, authentic record of the Cape Cod U-boat attack is still
lacking. Occasionally, however, a new bit of information is added to
the story by one who was at the scene. One of the best anecdotes was
told me by a physician who had a cottage on the shore and sat with a
telephone in his hand, observing the shelling and giving a running
account of the attack to the _Boston Globe_.

After the war this gentleman made a crossing on the Leviathan. He fell
into conversation with a German steward, mentioning that he was from
Cape Cod. The German asked if he had, by chance, ever heard of a U-boat
attack there during the war, and then proceeded to give an accurate
description of the Orleans attack. Thus, the doctor-reporter, who
had scored the biggest newspaper scoop in Cape Cod journalism and an
erstwhile member of the U-156 crew met in mid-Atlantic.

The German chuckled: “Yah! we had some fun on that cruise. You didn’t
know, did you, that some of us went ashore one night in a rubber boat
and attended a movie in your Beverly, Massachusetts!”

The only effort to repulse the attacking U-boat was made by a lone
flier from a Naval station at nearby Chatham. He lacked ammunition and
had to resort to bold bluffing. After diving a couple of times over the
submarine, he made a final low swoop and let fly a monkey wrench at the
heads of the crew standing on deck.

Some time ago an article I wrote about the Cape Cod attack was
reprinted in a digest magazine. A retired navy officer, in a little
town in Pennsylvania, read it. He wrote me: “Well do I remember that
dull overcast Sabbath morning, as I was the fellow who threw the monkey
wrench.” And, he invited me to drop in, if I ever got around his way,
and he’d tell me “the whole story.”




EASTHAM----

    _Local Boy Makes Good On
    First Bombing of Tokio_


Eastham, Cape Cod, has a real claim to present-day fame. This
unexciting, though historic little settlement, near the outer end of
the sickle, is the home of Master Sgt. Edwin W. Horton, Jr., member of
the Doolittle party on the first bombing of Tokio in World War II.

On his return to this country, Horton, at the first opportunity,
hastened back to little Eastham for a quiet visit. And brought his
bride to introduce to the home folks.

Eastham is small but historically she is important. The original name
was Nauset. Here the Pilgrims, exploring after their arrival on the
Mayflower, had their first encounter with the Indians. The forefathers
focused particular attention on the fertile soil, Thomas Prence,
Governor of Plymouth Colony, describing it as the “richest soyle, for
ye most part a blackish & deep mould, much like that wher groweth ye
best Tobacco in Virginia.” Today Eastham is still outstanding as a
farming place, noted especially for her asparagus production.

  _Provincetown for beauty,
  Wellfleet for pride,
  If it wasn’t for milk cans
  Eastham ’d’ a died._

Thus the sing-song went when, later, the lush Nauset dairy herds
provided milk for a good part of the Cape. And Eastham, truly
farming-minded, would fling back these better known lines:

  _The Cape Cod girls they have no combs,
  They comb their hair with codfish bones;
  The Cape Cod Boys they have no sleds,
  They slide downhill on codfish heads._


PILGRIM’S TREE STILL BLOSSOMS

Life still springs from at least one of the plantings of those far
distant days of the forefathers. Thomas Prence, who first set foot
on the Cape in 1621, subsequently built a house for himself and his
bride near Fort Hill. He planted a little pear tree there; it had been
brought over from England.

Each Spring a pear tree blossoms on this site. Thoreau, in the book
on his Cape Cod travels, refers to the planting by Thomas Prence and
states the tree had been blown down a few months previous to his visit
to the scene. A modern historian, however, records that Thomas Prence’s
pear tree is still bearing, a sapling having been planted after the
old tree had been swept down in a gale. Thoreau quotes the following
tribute by a Cape Codder, a Mr. Herman Doane:

  “_That exiled band long since have passed away,
    And still, old Tree! Thou standest in the place
  Where Prence’s hand did plant thee in his day,--
    An undersigned memorial of his race._”


THE LAST WORKING WINDMILL

The lone workable windmill on Cape Cod is located in Eastham. Before
Pearl Harbor there would be a ceaseless trek of Summer visitors to the
Seth Knowles’ windmill and Miller John Fulcher would demonstrate its
ancient workings with true professional eclat. He’d set her sails,
swing her into the wind, give the lift wheel a deft spin, and, in jig
time, Miller John would turn out a bushel of ground corn before the
eyes of the intrigued city folk. Those who seemed to know asserted
that Miller John had the “miller’s thumb”. Dipping his thumb into the
trough, he would decide just when the corn was properly ground.

The story of the old windmill is vague. Some say it gave service
originally in Plymouth and then was “flaked” across the Bay to be
re-erected in Eastham. The date 1793 is nailed inside, but this still
leaves unanswered the point as to when and where its story begins.

There’s a tablet near a stretch of Eastham beach that memorializes
the “First Encounter.” The event is described in William Bradford’s
narrative:

“But, presently, all on ye sudain, they heard a great & strange crie,
which they knew to be the same voyces they heard in ye night, though
they varied their notes, & one of their company being abroad came
runing in & cried, ‘Men, Indeans, Indeans’; and withall, their arrowes
came flying amongst them. Their men rane with all speed to recover
their armes, as by ye good providence of God they did.... The crie of
ye Indeans was dreadfull, espetially when they saw ther men rune out of
ye randevoue towourds ye shallop, to recover their armes, the Indeans
wheeling aboute upon them. But some runing out with coats of malle
on, & cutlesses in their hands, they soon got their armes & let flye
amongst them, and quickly stopped their violence.”

Bradford’s narrative reveals, also, why the redskins were in a
war-making mood.

Six years previous “one Hunt, a mr. of a ship” had visited this scene.
Hunt had seized 24 of the Nauset Indians and taken them to Spain in
slave chains and, it is elsewhere related, he “sold these silly savages
for rials of eight.”

What changes are wrought by the years! Where slavery was introduced in
the early 17th century, a native son now is ranked with America’s great
heroes in a global war for freedom.




SOUTH WELLFLEET----

    _Our World Communications System
    Began with Marconi’s Triumph
    On a Lonely Ocean Bluff_


How many Americans know that our world radio system was given birth on
Cape Cod?

Guglielmo Marconi achieved his great goal on the oceanside of South
Wellfleet, out near the end of the Cape. Here, on the Sabbath night
of January 19, 1903, he got through the first trans-Atlantic wireless
telegraph message. Modern radio developed from that beginning.

The overseas wireless message was a greeting from President Theodore
Roosevelt to King Edward. It read:


                                              White House, Jan. 19, 1903

  His Majesty Edward VII
  London, England

  In taking advantage of the wonderful triumph
  of scientific research and ingenuity which has been
  achieved in perfecting a system of wireless telegraphy,
  I extend on behalf of the American people,
  most cordial greetings and good wishes to you and
  to all the people of the British Empire.

                                                      Theodore Roosevelt

King Edward’s response came several days later--proof that Marconi had
completely succeeded in his long work of experimenting.


THE FIRST-HAND STORY

Then Charlie Paine, gaunt Cape Cod native, entered the scene. He had
been engaged to get the King’s message to the Wellfleet telegraph
office, whence it was to be dispatched to the White House. But,
Marconi’s horse-and-buggy courier, holding to an old Cape Cod trait,
showed not a twitch of emotion--“he wasn’t goin’ to kill his horse for
nobody.” Old Charlie Paine passed on about two years ago in his native
South Wellfleet. This is how he related his part in the big day of
excitement:

“The first message Marconi ever got through from the other side of the
ocean I took from his hand to carry to the telegraph office. I’d waited
about six days to get it, with Black Diamond hitched up in the buggy
most of the time. We jes stayed there, ready to go any minute.

“It was winter and colder’n Greenland. Dimey had two blankets over her
and I was wearin’ Steve Paine’s wolf coat that he shot up in Alaska.
All of a sudden I see Marconi come rearin’ out of the plant with both
hands full of tape. He was jes like a crazy man.

“‘You wait there, Paine, and I’ll be with you in a minute,’ he shouted,
and started for his office. I got my buggy turned around ready. The
nearest telegraph office was Wellfleet, four miles away. When he came
out again he had two big envelopes in his hand. They were messages to
be telegraphed to Washington and New York. I found out later that it
was a message from King Edward to President Theodore Roosevelt, for one
envelope was addressed to the White House and the other to a New York
newspaper.

“‘Drive like the wind!’ says Marconi. ‘If you kill your horse I’ll buy
you another.’

“Well, I started off for Wellfleet as fast as I could make Dimey go.
But when I got over the dunes, out of sight, I slowed down. I couldn’t
see any need of goin’ crazy over a telegraph message. ’Twas four miles
of hard goin’ and I wasn’t goin’ to kill my horse for nobody. Jim Swett
was telegraph operator at Wellfleet railroad station then and I gave
him the two envelopes. And that’s all there was to it.”


MARCONI WAS JUST 29

Marconi was not yet in his 30th year. First he had proved wireless
practicable by communicating across the French channel from his
native Bologna in 1899. Working at Cornwall, he made contact with
Newfoundland. His Cape Cod transmission of President Roosevelt’s
message was the crowning achievement of his career. Thereon the
Marconi Wireless Telegraph Company of America became absorbed in a
brisk overseas business. The _London Times_ received part of its
American news through this Cape Cod station.

The term Marconigram became familiar to American ears. Marconi’s system
was adopted by the British and Italian navies. He took charge of
wireless operations of the Italian government during the last war. He
was awarded the Nobel prize for physics in 1909, and the J. Scott medal
for the invention of wireless telegraphy on June 5, 1931.

The pioneering was done on a high bluff overlooking the endless
sweep of the Atlantic. Work was started in 1901. Twenty immense
spars, 200 feet high, were erected in a circle. The station proper
was a one-story bungalow. Marconi and his crew slept and ate in a
cottage a few paces away. The big poles hadn’t been up long when a
nor’easter howled down on the exposed spot. They were knocked over
like matchsticks. Ice contributed to the damage and the loss ran into
$50,000. Then four towers of steel and wood, rooted with blocks of
cement and cables were erected, and they stayed put.


FAMOUS SITE UNMARKED

Mrs. Eliza J. Doane of South Wellfleet cooked for Marconi and his men.
She said: “Mr. Marconi could play the piano something grand, and he had
a pleasing voice. He was especially fond of ‘Old Black Joe’. He and the
others would sing that almost every time they got around the piano.”

A few years ago, when I last visited the scene, only the twisted ends
of cable, the broken cement blocks, studded with bolts, and a few
heavy timbers, revealed the historic scene. Unless the storm-lashed
tides have crumbled the embankment, the important debris is still
there. There was talk of establishing a “Marconi Park,” with a suitable
tablet. Prof. Frederick C. Hicks of Yale Law School led a group of
summer cottagers sponsoring the project. But, something stymied the
plans.

During its commercial career, the South Wellfleet station had a
range of about 1600 miles. At night, under favorable conditions, it
transmitted messages to a distance of 3500 miles. The government closed
this and other wireless stations for the duration of the last war. When
peace came the Chatham station of the Radio Corporation of America, a
few towns up the Cape, took over the Marconi commercial business.




ADMIRAL NIMITZ----

    _Cape Cod’s Most Famous
    Summer Resident_


Cape Cod’s most distinguished summer visitor--Admiral Chester W.
Nimitz--plans to resume his summer vacationing in Wellfleet, Cape Cod,
after the war.

The great Naval leader who is directing the defeat of Japan manages
to keep up correspondence with his sister-in-law, Miss Elizabeth E.
Freeman of Wellfleet. Miss Freeman, who is Mrs. Nimitz’s sister, says
he has written her how he misses the Cape and that he looks forward to
his return.

For many years the Admiral and his family have vacationed in Wellfleet.
Their haven is deeply secluded in the woods on Gull Pond Road. The
inaccessibility of the place is the reason why, perhaps, so few people
are aware of the Cape Cod ties of one of the illustrious figures of
modern world history.

The Admiral’s efficient and courageous son, Lieut. Commander Chester W.
Nimitz, Jr., who has been twice decorated for heroism, calls Wellfleet
his home. He has done so in making out his personal Naval records ever
since his graduation from Annapolis, Miss Freeman informed me. As late
as last summer Commander Nimitz managed to get in a Wellfleet visit,
and his wife and child spent all the summer there.


FISHING HIS RECREATION

The last time Admiral Nimitz and Mrs. Nimitz vacationed at Wellfleet
was in April, 1941. Members of his family, however, continue to
visit there at least once or twice every year. The two older Nimitz
daughters, Catherine, who is head of the music division in the
Washington, D. C. Library, and Nancy, who is in the Information
Division of the library, were at Wellfleet for a week last spring--they
brought with them some Navy friends and people of the musical world.
Catherine and Nancy plan to return next September and spend a month.

A Cape Cod story on Admiral Nimitz reflects the same quiet dignity and
staunchness of character that folks at home vision when they read of
him in the great war dispatches out of the Pacific. Fundamentally, he
is a man of simple tastes. He has done nothing on the Cape to cause a
personal headline in the newspapers and, from summer to summer, has
moved among his less gifted Wellfleet neighbors practically unnoticed.
Which is the way he seems to like it.

“Most of his time in Wellfleet is spent walking in the woods and
fishing. These are his chief pleasures. He reads of course, but he
doesn’t spend as much time at it as he does roaming in the outdoors. He
is a good fisherman,” relates Miss Freeman.

The Admiral and Mrs. Nimitz, nee Catherine Vance Freeman, daughter of
the late Richard R. Freeman, a Boston ship broker, were married in
1913. She was born in Wollaston, Mass. Since birth she and others of
her family have summered at Wellfleet. After her marriage, however,
she travelled far to be with her husband, living on the West Coast and
in China, Germany and other foreign places.

At first the Nimitzes spent their summer visits at the old Freeman
family house, outside Wellfleet, on Route 6. During the last war the
family summer home was re-established in the remote Gull Pond section,
one of the most primitive and lovely spots on Cape Cod. Here Mrs.
Nimitz’s sister makes her year-round residence. The former residence is
now owned by Edmund Wilson, literary critic of _The New Yorker_
magazine.


ADMIRAL KING’S JOB HERE

Some time ago a large picture was on the front page of the _New York
Times_, showing Admiral Ernest J. King, Commander-in-Chief of the
United States fleet, presenting the second Distinguished Service medal
to Admiral Nimitz. Forming an admiring audience were Admiral William F.
Halsey, Mrs. Nimitz and 13-year-old Mary Nimitz. It is an interesting
coincidence to set down in a Cape Cod story that Admiral King also is
no stranger to Cape Cod. He used to take many a long walk to stretch
his sea legs on Provincetown’s Commercial Street when he was a Captain
in the Navy and in charge of salvaging the tragic submarine S-4, sunken
outside Provincetown harbor with a loss of 40 lives.




TRURO----

    _The “Blond Norseman”--Cape
    Cod’s Most Ancient
    Ghost Visitor_


Ten years ago, approximately, the Blond Norseman came out of his spirit
world to re-visit Cape Cod. That is the latest report on this most
ancient member of Cape Cod’s gallery of wraiths.

The setting is the wild, beach-grass country of Corn Hill, Truro. Here,
close by the far-flung shore of Cape Cod Bay, where only the seagull’s
lonely cry breaks the silence and sand peeps skitter to and fro on
their ceaseless foraging, stands a weather-battered, sprawling frame
structure known as “The Fish House.” For a long time the sea harvesters
used it for a headquarters; later it became the loved dwelling of a
large family who would remain there as long as the winds and the rains
of late fall would permit.

On one of these late fall nights, the lady of the household was
awakened abruptly from a sound sleep. Sitting up, her gaze was drawn
to the door that faced the noisy surf of the bay shore. The door was
flung wide. A “startling blue light” illumined the figure of a tall,
distinctly blond man, so powerful of stature and awesomely erect, that
he filled the door frame. The apparition did not move, its presence
was only momentary, for, in the next instant, the lady was staring at
the gaping door. She got up, closed the door and spent the rest of the
night in wakeful wonderment. But, to this day, the vivid impression of
the brief visit of the Blond Norseman remains with her.

The following day she mentioned it to a friend. He was not greatly
surprised, for he recalled a nighttime stroll along the beach some
weeks previous and related how he had discovered a bright light that
loomed up not many yards ahead of him. Thinking it was a man with a
lantern, the stroller called out. He got no answer, and the light
disappeared instantly. He was sure, that night, he had witnessed
something supernatural.


ANCIENT GRAVE MAY BE CLUE

Then the lady mentioned the incident to the owner of a large fish
business, whose plant is two or three miles up the beach. He, too, was
sympathetic. “Oh, yes,” he responded, “that’s the Blond Norseman. My
men have talked about him often. It’s an old story to them.”

Commander Donald B. MacMillan, the Arctic explorer, of Provincetown,
likewise gave a respectful ear and even suggested that the grave of
the Norse warrior who had returned to this hurly-burly world might
be located near the Fish House. Norsemen colonized along the North
Atlantic coast. Historians say that Leif Ericson and his men were the
earliest settlers on the Cape and that Thorwald died from an Indian’s
arrow in Yarmouth on the Bay side. It is said that as he lay mortally
wounded, Thorwald told his men, “Bury me here; place a cross at my
head, another at my feet, call it ‘Crossness’ forever more.”


DIGGING PARTY UNCOVERS SKELETONS

The grave that might be that of the Blond Norseman was found by a
Mayflower party of explorers, according to Mourt’s Relation. The
discovery was made after the Pilgrims found the Indians’ cache of corn
on the lofty eminence now called Corn Hill. Two skeletons were turned
up by the second digging party, one a man’s and the other, possibly
that of an Indian child. The man’s skull “had fine yellow hair still on
it.” Norse scholars have shown much interest in this grave and there
has been considerable conjecture concerning it. But, little of real
factual value on the Blond Norseman has turned up thus far.

It might be assumed that this daddy of all Cape Cod ghosts merely
returned to this earthly world to go over scenes dear to his heart. For
it is generally established that spirits that have stalked the Cape are
not the vengeful kind, but rather companionable and of a comradely mood
for returning to places fragrant in their memories.


A FRONT-PAGE GHOST

This reporter once covered a dramatic spook-story in the early part
of his Cape Cod newspaper career. The incident was unusual because it
involved a trouble-brewing spook and made unhappiness all around.

A lady from New York had rented an old house facing the highway in
North Truro and had paid $200 down, intending to operate a summer tea
room. But her uneasiness grew following each night she spent alone in
the old house. There would be the slamming of a door at an eerie hour
after midnight, or the frequent tread of creaking footsteps up and
down the narrow little front staircase. Finally there came the morning
when a blanket-fog came down into the valley and enveloped the quaint
old house.

The New York lady sat chatting in the kitchen with a Portuguese
neighbor and as they talked the weird thing happened. A big, sturdy
rocker that stood in a corner of the room began to rock. Back and
forth, with an even motion, just as though someone was in the seat, the
rocking continued.

Spellbound, the two women watched the strange business for at least two
or three minutes. It was the last straw for the lady from New York.
She made the door in two bounds and didn’t even bother to grasp up a
handbag on the table that contained a sizeable sum. She forfeited the
$200 rental payment and returned to Manhattan the next day after a more
courageous neighbor had ventured into the haunted house to retrieve the
abandoned handbag.




A CAPE CODDER----

    _Pioneered Our
    Trans-Atlantic Steamship Service_


Truro, Cape Cod, looks out over the heaving Atlantic to the horizon,
and beyond lies Spain. Great romance colors the adventures of Truro’s
seafaring men of long, long ago. There is also, in consistent fashion,
the darkest tragedy.

Truro is the birthplace of Edward K. Collins, who established the first
trans-Atlantic steamship service from the American shore. His elegantly
equipped paddle-wheel steamer, “Atlantic”, embarked on the first
crossing on April 27, 1850 and completed the voyage within 11 days.

The story of Edward Collins’ career has all the elements to make an
exciting novel or a Hollywood movie--for the lad of 15 who went to
New York to become the nation’s mightiest ship operator--launching
“the most ambitious and spectacular attempt of the American merchant
marine to challenge British supremacy”--finally ended up as a hum-drum
land-bound provision dealer, yet “rosy, hearty and not careworn as when
he had those mighty American steamships resting on his shoulders.”

Seafaring was deep-rooted as the trade of the Collins family. Edward
began with his father in the shipping and commission business; they
operated a service to Vera Cruz and New Orleans. The father died, then
the E. K. Collins & Co. firm was founded and its sign was prominent
on the New York waterfront for almost a half century. Associated with
Collins was a Count Foster of New Orleans.


CALLED “THEATRICAL LINE”

The spectacular Cape Codder and his partner established the Dramatic
Line, to run packets between New York and England. Capt. Lorenzo D.
Baker of Wellfleet, Cape Cod, was scoffed at when he announced he was
going to popularize the banana in the United States and so was Collins
when shipping men heard he was building ships of 1000 tons. His critics
argued there would not be cargoes large enough to fill them, nor
would merchants trust their goods in them. So, in their hoots, they
coined a name for the Dramatic Line. They called it the “Theatrical
Line” because Collins named his vessels for famous authors and actors:
Shakespeare, Siddons, Garrick, Sheridan and Roscius, to mention a few.

Collins had become one of New York’s richest men when the curtain
raised on the era of steam. He visioned the possibilities and watched
closely after England gave Samuel Cunard a subsidy mail contract in
1838. The Cunard Line berthed its first ship at this shore on July 18,
1840. Collins, according to the record at this point, saw a challenge
in the British enterprise. He barged into a financing spree, determined
“to drive the Cunarders out of business.”

Collins went to the nation’s capital for the money he needed. There
he began on a grandiose scale and gradually descended with a series
of headaches to ultimate ruin. His first triumph was the granting of
a government subsidy of $385,000 a year for a period of ten years.
He and his associates were pledged to build five steamers in the
Collins-style, which would make twenty round trips annually, carrying
the mails. In 1852 fortnightly service was established and the subsidy
was increased to $858,000 annually.

The Collins Line prospered for two years. Then the clouds began to
gather.


THE TRAGIC DECLINE

On Sept. 27, 1854, off Cape Race, New York, a Collins steamer, the
Artic, collided with a small French steamer, the Vesta. The Arctic went
down with a loss of 233 passengers and 135 members of the crew. Among
the victims was Edward Collins’ wife, the former Mary Ann Woodruff,
and his son and his daughter. The master of the Arctic, Capt. James C.
Luce, of Martha’s Vineyard ancestry, held his own child in his arms
through the awful scenes of panic. As he was about to launch a raft,
some debris from the paddlebox struck and killed the child.

Then came the second blow. The steamer Pacific of the Collins Line put
out from Liverpool on January 25, 1856, with 45 passengers and a crew
of 141. She was never heard from again. No clue to her fate was ever
turned up.

Meanwhile Collins had been having his troubles in Washington, and now
they were piling up. A public clamor was on; the general theme was
that the Cunard Line competition was too keen. Congress withdrew the
second subsidy. A contract was made with the rival line of Cornelius
Vanderbilt. Gradually the Collins Line sank to failure and the panic of
1857 put a period to its glorious adventuring. Fortunes were lost by
investors in the line.




PROVINCETOWN----

    _Its Town Seal Reads,
    “Birthplace of American Liberty”_


Millions of Americans do not know the complete story of the founding
of our nation. Many history books and most orators fail to begin at
the beginning when the pioneering of the Pilgrim Fathers is related.
Plymouth Rock is the accepted symbol and the starting point. The
important, earlier events on Cape Cod are passed up, particularly the
contribution the Pilgrim Fathers made to our form of free government
during their Cape Cod stay, before sailing across the bay to establish
their settlement at Plymouth.

If you began at the beginning of the Pilgrims’ story on this continent,
you would find that the Mayflower did not sail direct to Plymouth,
as is the common impression. She first put in at the outer end of
Cape Cod on Nov. 11, 1620, (O. S.), after a violent, 63-day voyage
from Holland, and it was on the sands of what is now Provincetown
that her weary passengers first set foot on American soil. Here they
found haven for a full month, here they signed the historic Mayflower
Compact, establishing their system of self-government. They began their
reconnoitering, found their first drinking water, their first corn and
had their first encounter with the Indians on Cape Cod.


HOW OUR FREEDOM BEGAN

But, all this is not to deny Plymouth her fame, even though the town
seal of Provincetown does bear the words, “Birthplace of American
Liberty.” That claim has been a bone of contention for a long time.
And, when a Massachusetts State official was asked some years ago why
the Provincetown phase in the story of the founding of the nation
had received so little attention, he could only suggest, “Perhaps it
happened that way because Plymouth was 300 years ahead of Provincetown
in her advertising.”

Actually, however, the signing of the Mayflower Compact was not the
first step taken to establish free Government in the New World. Our
democratic government was first introduced at Jamestown Colony the year
previous to the Pilgrims’ arrival on Cape Cod. There, on June 30, 1619,
America’s first legislative body convened.

John Quincy Adams said of the Mayflower Compact: “This is perhaps the
only instance in human history, of that positive, original social
concept, which speculative philosophers have imagined as the only
legitimate source of government.”

In Mourt’s Relation there is Governor Bradford’s simple, though
picturesque description of Provincetown Harbor and ancient Cape Cod as
the Pilgrims discovered the scene:


WHAT THE PILGRIMS FOUND

“It is a good harbor and pleasant bay, circled round, except in the
entrance, which is about four miles from land to land, compassed to
the very sea, with oaks, pines, juniper, sassafras, and other sweet
wood. It is a harbor wherein a thousand sail of ship may safely ride.
There we relieved ourselves with wood and water, and refreshed our
people while our shallop was fitted to coast the bay, to search for an
habitation; there was the greatest store of fowl that we ever saw. And
every day we saw whales playing hard by us, of which, in that place, if
we had instruments, and means to take them we might have made a very
rich return, which to our great grief, we wanted. Our master and his
mate, and others experienced in fishing, professed that we might have
made three or four thousand pounds worth of oil; they preferred it
before Greenland whale fishing and purposed the next Winter to fish for
whale here.”

The first of the exploring Pilgrims “were forced to wade a bow-shoot or
two in going aland, which caused many to get colds and coughs, for it
was many times freezing cold weather.” Much sickness developed in the
first harsh Winter and some deaths occurred later in Plymouth.


WILL ROGERS ON THE PILGRIMS

Some years ago Plymouth and Provincetown engaged in a harmless tiff
over the rightful ownership of the title, “Birthplace of American
Liberty.” The late Will Rogers, cowboy humorist, who was of Indian
descent, was drawn into the controversy via the radio. Said Will:

“What makes my Cherokee blood boil is that the Pilgrims were allowed to
land anywhere. As a race the Pilgrims could never be compared with the
Indians. I’m sure that it was only through the extreme generosity of my
ancestors that the Pilgrims were allowed to land at all.

“Anyhow, Provincetown says the Pilgrims found some corn buried there,
and that this saved them from starving to death. Then they shot the
Indians. That was because they had not stored any more corn.

“Next they prayed. You know one thing the Pilgrims always did was to
pray, but you never saw a picture of a Pilgrim who didn’t have a gun
beside him. That was to see that he got what he was praying for!”




CAPE COD FISHING----

    _Excitement of Catching Tuna
    In The Traps_


A hefty axe is the main implement of a trap-fishing crew when the tuna
run is on in Cape Cod waters. A tuna may weigh 50 to 1,000 pounds and
often a net is crowded with them. A crew of five men, operating a
50-foot boat, have their hands full when they move into the confines
of a big pole-net to take the clumsy and frantic fish. So, the
stout-handled axe is brought into play before the tuna are brought
aboard.

The killing technique is a thoroughly gory business. The axe-swinger, a
seasoned hand, rarely misses when he aims a lusty blow at the lump that
is atop the tuna’s head. One expert blow on this vital spot usually
kills the fish instantly, but, the process of maneuvering the tuna for
the kill is highly active, calling for a nimble foot and split-second
judgment. Thereon the blood flies freely and profusely.

Sometimes, in these wild jousts, a man goes overboard. Occasionally an
arm or a leg is broken during the topside excitement. But the tuna,
for all its size, does not attack. The fisherman has only to keep a
weather eye peeled to keep clear of its mighty tail.

A trapper relates an experience he had when he tried “a new way” of
dispatching a tuna. “I shoved the gaff down his mouth with everything
I had. A few minutes later I woke up in the bottom of the boat with a
big goose-egg on my head.” Another trapper was dragged overboard, gaff
and all, and the tuna towed him clear out of the trap. He let go as the
tuna dived under and escaped, gaff and all.


FIND WHALES, TOO

Once in a while old leviathan himself stumbles into one of Cape Cod’s
fish traps. He’s usually a finback whale, valueless to present-day
fishermen, and just a nuisance. His great, threshing flukes threaten
death. The trap has to be partially dismantled so that the crew,
working at a safe distance, can shoo him out. Then follows a whole
day’s work of repairing the damage.

In Cape Cod waters there are more pole-traps, or weirs, than in any
other section of the Atlantic coast. Most of them are off Provincetown,
and part of the large profits they yield help enrich the town
government coffers. Long poles of tough hickory are shipped in from
Connecticut. Seventy of these are needed to drape the nets of a single
trap. First in the structure of a trap is the “leader”, a 900-foot
subterranean fence. This fence begins in shoal water and extends
offshore to the main body of the trap. When fish swim into it, they
do not turn inshore. As a rule they follow along the fence and swim
offshore.

Thus, the schools obligingly move into the mouth of the trap. From
there they go into the trap “heart”, which is the first stage of their
captivity, and thence into the “bowl”. Once inside the bowl the
baffled finny tribes are completely hoodwinked and rarely escape into
open water. Here they swim around and around until the trapping crew
pays the morning visit and the net is hauled up and pursed for the
bailers to go into action.

Commercial fishing in Cape Cod Bay provided the means for establishing
Massachusetts’ public school system. The Pilgrims appropriated the
profits to public uses. Portions of the fishery fund were allocated to
various towns. Barnstable, Cape Cod, being one of the beneficiaries in
1683.

When the Pilgrims went to King James to get his consent for the
Mayflower voyage to America, the King, according to Edward Winslow’s
narrative, inquired, “What profit might arise?” A single word was the
Pilgrims’ response: “Fishing.” James was satisfied: “So God have my
soul, ’tis an honest trade, ’twas the Apostle’s own calling.”


ROMANTIC EARLY DAYS

Subsequently, Captain John Smith, after he had pocketed a profit of
$7500 on a shipment of dried Cape Cod fish to Spain, is credited with
the statement that the richest mine in Spain was not as valuable as the
Cape Cod fisheries.

Whales first were caught in these waters. When they became scarce
vessels were fitted to go out in search of them. On one voyage, Capt.
Jesse Holbrook of Wellfleet, active in the Revolutionary War period,
killed 52 sperm whales. His skill was so good a London company employed
him for 12 years to give instruction to their employees.

Franklin Atkins was a Cape Codder who had a rare experience while
whaling in West Indies waters. Leviathan’s flukes struck the small boat
he was in and sent the boat kiting from the sea. In his descent Mr.
Atkins fell directly into the whale’s gaping mouth. He was gashed and
bruised, but managed to free himself. A boat crew picked him up and he
lay in a critical condition for four weeks. In later years Mr. Atkins
would boast, “Jonah and me were the only two persons that have been in
a whale’s mouth and come out alive.”

Ambergris, a secretion found in the intestines of an occasional sperm
whale, and worth more than its weight in gold, was a prize the old
whalemen always were on the alert for. The story is told of how a Cape
Cod crew, jittery with excitement over an ambergris find in a whale
they were spading alongside the vessel, lost it. In their eagerness of
hauling up the treasure they fumbled. The ambergris chunk slipped from
the slings. The crew stared with blank dismay as they watched the prize
worth $25,000 slowly vanish in 60 fathoms of water.

It’s small boat, inshore fishing in these modern times. Yet there
is a constant yield of millions of pounds of fish taken by net or
hook. There are whiting, mackerel, cod, haddock, herring, butterfish,
bluefish, squid, sea bass, pollock and many other species.




ON CAPE COD----

    _Is the Second Most
    Powerful Beacon on
    the Atlantic Coast_


The second most powerful beacon on the Atlantic coast is located on the
far end of Cape Cod. Highland Light is situated near the edge of a high
bluff on the ocean side of North Truro. Its nightly beam, revolving and
flashing to all points of the compass, has guided mariners for almost
150 years.

The champ of all beacons on this coast is Neversink Light, at Sandy
Hook.

Countless summer visitors would look over Highland Light in peacetime,
but now, of course, visitors are barred. They came from every state
in the union and from foreign places, for this faithful landmark has
always been a standard attraction for the Cape Cod sightseer. Chief
Boatswain’s Mate William Joseph, who has been in charge of the light
for a long while, recalls they asked some odd questions. For example:

“Is the light lit in the wintertime?”

“Do you stay here year ’round?”

“Does the fog start up the foghorn?”

“Why do you keep ‘blankets’ on the lenses in the daytime?”

“Does the tide ever come over the banking (the edge of the banking is a
mere 140 feet above the shoreline)?”

“Did you ever help catch rum-runners with the light?”

“How do you keep awake all night long?”


COVER LENSES TO PREVENT FIRES

But, the lightkeeper, his assistants and their womenfolk take it all in
stride with cheerful patience.

The mighty lenses are covered up in daytime, but not with “blankets”.
The lightkeeper gives the reason for this: “Every morning we put a
linen covering over the lenses and over that a covering of starched
linen. There is no covering on the north side of the light because the
sun doesn’t hit there.

“The coverings are necessary to protect surrounding property. The
lighthouse lenses, if they were left uncovered, would set afire a
building 25 feet away, or anything else that would burn.”

There have been numerous other lamps before the present electrically
operated one, with its $30,000 French glassworks and four revolving
bullseyes. The original light, established in 1797, was stationary and
burned whale oil in wick lamps, much like the old-fashioned sitting
room lamp. The light has always stood on the present site.

Ashore the great beacon is always referred to as Highland Light. “But,”
remarks the keeper, “if you were lost out there and tried to locate
Highland Light on the chart, you’d be plum out o’ luck. The official
name is Cape Cod Light and that’s the name all the mariners go by.”

Highland Light has cast its flash over many a dramatic event in its
long lifetime. Almost within its shadow, the first piece of wreckage
that revealed the fate of the Steamer Portland--New England’s most
appalling sea tragedy to this day--was washed ashore in the terrible
gale of November, 1898. Countless rescues by the breeches buoy, and
the foundering of old-time sailing ships were witnessed there. Mighty
gales, 75 to 80 miles an hour, have belabored the lighthouse, but it
has breasted them all.


A MARKER FOR ZEPPELIN

The German Zeppelin, burned at Lakehurst, N. J., made a practice of
pointing its course directly over Highland Light on its return trips to
Germany.

The light has one implacable enemy--fog. When the heavy vapor banks
roll in, the beam is practically invisible. In a real thick fog not
even the glow of the lamp can be seen by one standing at the base of
the tower.

Many visitors, noting the close proximity of the lighthouse to the edge
of the shore embankment, have inquired whether there is danger the sea
will some day undermine Highland Light. Keeper Joseph has never worried
about this. When, in 1796, the Government purchased the tract of land
for the erection of the lighthouse, the reservation comprised ten
acres. Storms and pounding surf have swept six acres of the original
site into the sea.




FIRST REAL GLIDER FLIGHT IN U. S.----

    _Witnessed Over Cape Cod Waters_


The invasion of Sicily was begun with glider transports. And, the
beginning of glider-flying in the United States was witnessed on Cape
Cod. Sixteen years ago the first extended glider flight in America was
demonstrated by a German expert.

On July 29, 1928, at Corn Hill, Truro, near the outer end of this
historic peninsula, Peter Hesselbach of Darmstadt, Germany, was
catapulted over the brink of a 100-foot bluff in a Darmstadt-made
glider. He remained aloft for four hours and five minutes. A few days
before this, Hesselbach smashed Orville Wright’s record of soaring nine
minutes and forty-five seconds. A group of helpful American citizens,
hauling on a rope, snapped him into the ether on the ocean side of
Truro. He maintained a motorless flight for 55 minutes.

Glider flying has progressed a great deal since those pioneering
flights. Soon after a school was established at South Wellfleet,
but it didn’t last long. Much activity developed in California and
in the East. Elmira, N. Y., became the headquarters of motorless
flying enthusiasts. Before our entry into the war, Parker Leonard of
Osterville, Cape Cod, was the chief glider experimenter in this area.
Now he is serving his country as a glider specialist.


STUDIED THE GULLS

Peter Hesselbach and his German comrades who accompanied him to this
country were a companionable lot and popular with the Summer folk
that Summer of 1928. Corn Hill is situated in a primitive setting,
with unbounded spaces of hills, marsh land, and beach, and faces the
great sweep of Cape Cod Bay. It is a lofty hill and on its top is a
bronze tablet attesting that here the reconnoitering Pilgrims found
the Indians’ cache of corn which enabled them to survive the first
hard year in Plymouth. And, looking out over the waters one discerns
the outline of Provincetown Harbor where the Mayflower was anchored
and where the Pilgrim fathers signed their Compact, the genesis of
our American form of free Government. A group of rude cottages are
perched atop Corn Hill. Two of them were occupied by the German glider
experts. A haus frau, brought in from somewhere, served up hearty
German dishes and all in all it was a very pleasant Summer. For
recreation, the visitors whizzed into Provincetown for ice cream cones
and gingerale--“gingeraley” they called it. Often they would sit for
long periods at the end of a Provincetown wharf, studying the soaring,
wheeling, dipping flight of the gulls.

Sometimes their American neighbors would pull on a rope and lift the
glider into the air on the numerous practice flights. Setting off on
his four hours and five minutes-flight, Peter Hesselbach was propelled
over the edge of Corn Hill by a rubber slingshot and a tail-tripper
arrangement that was clamped to a planking and worked by a lever.
Several hundred Summerers and natives from surrounding towns witnessed
that epochal event. A good representation of Boston newspaper cameramen
took pictures of the 55-minute flight. Newsreel men also made a
recording.

It was a beautiful, bright day when Hesselbach got off on his long
flight at 9:55 A. M. He was hoping to be able to beat the world record
for a soaring flight at that time--14 hours, 23 minutes. A series of
bonfires stretching for two miles along the beach would have guided him
on the nocturnal part of his adventure. For sustenance he took with him
a few sandwiches and some coffee.


TRAVELLED 120 MILES

Spectators exclaimed at the graceful serenity of the fine glider craft,
wafting silently with the air currents over their heads against a blue
and cloud-flecked sky. The Darmstadt wafted northward and southward on
a one to two miles’ course, going back and forth over the white-capped
bay or surrounding hills and banking gracefully over Corn Hill on each
return trip.

Once, as Peter Hesselbach circled Corn Hill, Captain Paul Roehre, a
gliding comrade, roared up to him:

“Are you hungry?”

With a wave of his hand, Hesselbach responded, “What’s the use?”

Finally he landed at Wellfleet, an adjoining town. The writer picked
him up at a crossroads and brought him back to Corn Hill. These were
his first words:

“I came down because I could not fly for the hills and gain altitude
after the wind changed more to the north. I went off my course
purposely. I wanted to study air conditions. This territory is ideal
for soaring. It has much better possibilities than Rossiten, which is
one of the best soaring places in Germany.”

“My altimeter shows I reached a maximum altitude of 350 feet. The wind
velocity was about 30 miles an hour. I soared a total of 120 miles.”

It’s a far cry from Cape Cod to Sicily. But that’s how glider flying
actually got its springboard start in America.

[Illustration]




  Transcriber’s Notes

  Perceived typographical errors have been silently corrected.

  Colloquial spelling in dialog has been retained as in the original.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation and compound words have not been
  standardized.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75918 ***
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Communist Manifesto
by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Communist Manifesto

Author: Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels

Release Date: January 25, 2005 [EBook #61]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMMUNIST MANIFESTO ***




Transcribed by Allen Lutins with assistance from Jim Tarzia.








MANIFESTO OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY

[From the English edition of 1888, edited by Friedrich Engels]


A spectre is haunting Europe--the spectre of Communism.
All the Powers of old Europe have entered into a holy alliance to
exorcise this spectre: Pope and Czar, Metternich and Guizot,
French Radicals and German police-spies.

Where is the party in opposition that has not been decried as
Communistic by its opponents in power?  Where is the Opposition
that has not hurled back the branding reproach of Communism,
against the more advanced opposition parties, as well as against
its reactionary adversaries?

Two things result from this fact.

I.  Communism is already acknowledged by all European Powers
to be itself a Power.

II.  It is high time that Communists should openly, in the
face of the whole world, publish their views, their aims, their
tendencies, and meet this nursery tale of the Spectre of
Communism with a Manifesto of the party itself.

To this end, Communists of various nationalities have
assembled in London, and sketched the following Manifesto, to be
published in the English, French, German, Italian, Flemish and
Danish languages.



I.  BOURGEOIS AND PROLETARIANS

The history of all hitherto existing societies is the history
of class struggles.

Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf,
guild-master and journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed,
stood in constant opposition to one another, carried on an
uninterrupted, now hidden, now open fight, a fight that each time
ended, either in a revolutionary re-constitution of society at
large, or in the common ruin of the contending classes.

In the earlier epochs of history, we find almost everywhere a
complicated arrangement of society into various orders, a
manifold gradation of social rank.  In ancient Rome we have
patricians, knights, plebeians, slaves; in the Middle Ages,
feudal lords, vassals, guild-masters, journeymen, apprentices,
serfs; in almost all of these classes, again, subordinate
gradations.

The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the ruins
of feudal society has not done away with class antagonisms.  It
has but established new classes, new conditions of oppression,
new forms of struggle in place of the old ones.  Our epoch, the
epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however, this distinctive
feature: it has simplified the class antagonisms. Society as a
whole is more and more splitting up into two great hostile camps,
into two great classes, directly facing each other: Bourgeoisie
and Proletariat.

From the serfs of the Middle Ages sprang the chartered burghers
of the earliest towns.  From these burgesses the first elements
of the bourgeoisie were developed.

The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape, opened up
fresh ground for the rising bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and
Chinese markets, the colonisation of America, trade with
the colonies, the increase in the means of exchange and in
commodities generally, gave to commerce, to navigation, to
industry, an impulse never before known, and thereby, to the
revolutionary element in the tottering feudal society, a rapid
development.

The feudal system of industry, under which industrial production
was monopolised by closed guilds, now no longer sufficed for the
growing wants of the new markets.  The manufacturing system took
its place.  The guild-masters were pushed on one side by the
manufacturing middle class; division of labour between the
different corporate guilds vanished in the face of division of
labour in each single workshop.

Meantime the markets kept ever growing, the demand ever rising.
Even manufacture no longer sufficed.  Thereupon, steam and
machinery revolutionised industrial production.  The place of
manufacture was taken by the giant, Modern Industry, the place of
the industrial middle class, by industrial millionaires, the
leaders of whole industrial armies, the modern bourgeois.

Modern industry has established the world-market, for which the
discovery of America paved the way.  This market has given an
immense development to commerce, to navigation, to communication
by land.  This development has, in its time, reacted on the
extension of industry; and in proportion as industry, commerce,
navigation, railways extended, in the same proportion the
bourgeoisie developed, increased its capital, and pushed into the
background  every class handed down from the Middle Ages.

We see, therefore, how the modern bourgeoisie is itself the
product of a long course of development, of a series of
revolutions in the modes of production and of exchange.

Each step in the development of the bourgeoisie was accompanied
by a corresponding political advance of that class.  An
oppressed class under the sway of the feudal nobility, an
armed and self-governing association in the mediaeval commune;
here independent urban republic (as in Italy and Germany),
there taxable "third estate" of the monarchy (as in France),
afterwards, in the  period of manufacture proper, serving either
the semi-feudal or the absolute monarchy as a counterpoise
against the nobility, and, in fact, corner-stone of the great
monarchies in general, the bourgeoisie has at last, since the
establishment of Modern Industry and of the world-market,
conquered for itself, in the modern representative State,
exclusive political sway.  The executive of the modern State is
but a committee for managing the common affairs of the whole
bourgeoisie.

The bourgeoisie, historically, has played a most revolutionary
part.

The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the upper hand, has put an
end to all feudal, patriarchal, idyllic relations.  It has
pitilessly torn asunder the motley feudal ties that bound man to
his "natural superiors," and has left remaining no other nexus
between man and man than naked self-interest, than callous "cash
payment."  It has drowned the most heavenly ecstasies of
religious fervour, of chivalrous enthusiasm, of philistine
sentimentalism, in the icy water of egotistical calculation.  It
has resolved personal worth into exchange value, and in place of
the numberless and indefeasible chartered freedoms, has set up that
single, unconscionable freedom--Free Trade.  In one word, for
exploitation, veiled by religious and political illusions, naked,
shameless, direct, brutal exploitation.

The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halo every occupation
hitherto honoured and looked up to with reverent awe.  It has
converted the physician, the lawyer, the priest, the poet, the
man of science, into its paid wage labourers.

The bourgeoisie has torn away from the family its sentimental
veil, and has reduced the family relation to a mere money
relation.

The bourgeoisie has disclosed how it came to pass that the
brutal display of vigour in the Middle Ages, which Reactionists
so much admire, found its fitting complement in the most slothful
indolence.  It has been the first to show what man's activity can
bring about.  It has accomplished wonders far surpassing Egyptian
pyramids, Roman aqueducts, and Gothic cathedrals; it has
conducted expeditions that put in the shade all former Exoduses
of nations and crusades.

The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionising
the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of
production, and with them the whole relations of society.
Conservation of the old modes of production in unaltered form,
was, on the contrary, the first condition of existence for all
earlier industrial classes. Constant revolutionising of
production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions,
everlasting uncertainty and agitation distinguish the bourgeois
epoch from all earlier ones. All fixed, fast-frozen relations,
with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and
opinions, are swept away, all new-formed ones become antiquated
before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air, all
that is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face
with sober senses, his real conditions of life, and his
relations with his kind.

The need of a constantly expanding market for its products
chases the bourgeoisie over the whole surface of the globe. It
must nestle everywhere, settle everywhere, establish connexions
everywhere.

The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world-market
given a cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in
every country.  To the great chagrin of Reactionists, it has
drawn from under the feet of industry the national ground on
which it stood.  All old-established national industries have
been destroyed or are daily being destroyed.  They are dislodged
by new industries, whose introduction becomes a life and death
question for all civilised nations, by industries that no longer
work up indigenous raw material, but raw material drawn from the
remotest zones; industries whose products are consumed, not only
at home, but in every quarter of the globe.  In place of the old
wants, satisfied by the productions of the country, we find new
wants, requiring for their satisfaction the products of distant
lands and climes.  In place of the old local and national
seclusion and self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every
direction, universal inter-dependence of nations.  And as in
material, so also in intellectual production.  The intellectual
creations of individual nations become common property.  National
one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness become more and more
impossible, and from the numerous national and local literatures,
there arises a world literature.

The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of
production, by the immensely facilitated means of communication,
draws all, even the most barbarian, nations into civilisation.
The cheap prices of its commodities are the heavy artillery with
which it batters down all Chinese walls, with which it forces the
barbarians' intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to
capitulate.  It compels all nations, on pain of extinction, to
adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it compels them to
introduce what it calls civilisation into their midst, i.e., to
become bourgeois themselves.  In one word, it creates a world
after its own image.

The bourgeoisie has subjected the country to the rule of the
towns.  It has created enormous cities, has greatly increased the
urban population as compared with the rural, and has thus rescued
a considerable part of the population from the idiocy of rural
life.  Just as it has made the country dependent on the towns, so
it has made barbarian and semi-barbarian countries dependent on
the civilised ones, nations of peasants on nations of bourgeois,
the East on the West.

The bourgeoisie keeps more and more doing away with the
scattered state of the population, of the means of production,
and of property.  It has agglomerated production, and has
concentrated property in a few hands.  The necessary consequence
of this was political centralisation.  Independent, or but
loosely connected provinces, with separate interests, laws,
governments and systems of taxation, became lumped together into
one nation, with one government, one code of laws, one national
class-interest, one frontier and one customs-tariff.  The
bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has
created more massive and more colossal productive forces than
have all preceding generations together.  Subjection of Nature's
forces to man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry
and agriculture, steam-navigation, railways, electric telegraphs,
clearing of whole continents for cultivation, canalisation of
rivers, whole populations conjured out of the ground--what
earlier century had even a presentiment that such productive
forces slumbered in the lap of social labour?

We see then: the means of production and of exchange, on whose
foundation the bourgeoisie built itself up, were generated in
feudal society.  At a certain stage in the development of these
means of production and of exchange, the conditions under which
feudal society produced and exchanged, the feudal organisation of
agriculture and manufacturing industry, in one word, the feudal
relations of property became no longer compatible with the
already developed productive forces; they became so many fetters.
They had to be burst asunder; they were burst asunder.

Into their place stepped free competition, accompanied by a
social and political constitution adapted to it, and by the
economical and political sway of the bourgeois class.

A similar movement is going on before our own eyes.  Modern
bourgeois society with its relations of production, of exchange
and of property, a society that has conjured up such gigantic
means of production and of exchange, is like the sorcerer, who is
no longer able to control the powers of the nether world whom he
has called up by his spells.  For many a decade past the history
of industry and commerce is but the history of the revolt of
modern productive forces against modern conditions of production,
against the property relations that are the conditions for the
existence of the bourgeoisie and of its rule.  It is enough to
mention the commercial crises that by their periodical return put
on its trial, each time more threateningly, the existence of the
entire bourgeois society.  In these crises a great part not only
of the existing products, but also of the previously created
productive forces, are periodically destroyed.  In these crises
there breaks out an epidemic that, in all earlier epochs, would
have seemed an absurdity--the epidemic of over-production.
Society suddenly finds itself put back into a state of momentary
barbarism; it appears as if a famine, a universal war of
devastation had cut off the supply of every means of subsistence;
industry and commerce seem to be destroyed; and why?  Because
there is too much civilisation, too much means of subsistence,
too much industry, too much commerce.  The productive forces at
the disposal of society no longer tend to further the development
of the conditions of bourgeois property; on the contrary, they
have become too powerful for these conditions, by which they are
fettered, and so soon as they overcome these fetters, they bring
disorder into the whole of bourgeois society, endanger the
existence of bourgeois property.  The conditions of bourgeois
society are too narrow to comprise the wealth created by them.
And how does the bourgeoisie get over these crises?  On the one
hand inforced destruction of a mass of productive forces; on the
other, by the conquest of new markets, and by the more thorough
exploitation of the old ones.  That is to say, by paving the
way for more extensive and more destructive crises, and by
diminishing the means whereby crises are prevented.

The weapons with which the bourgeoisie felled feudalism to the
ground are now turned against the bourgeoisie itself.

But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the weapons that bring
death to itself; it has also called into existence the men who
are to wield those weapons--the modern working class--the
proletarians.

In proportion as the bourgeoisie, i.e., capital, is developed,
in the same proportion is the proletariat, the modern working
class, developed--a class of labourers, who live only so long
as they find work, and who find work only so long as their labour
increases capital.  These labourers, who must sell themselves
piece-meal, are a commodity, like every other article of
commerce, and are consequently exposed to all the vicissitudes of
competition, to all the fluctuations of the market.

Owing to the extensive use of machinery and to division of
labour, the work of the proletarians has lost all individual
character, and consequently, all charm for the workman.  He
becomes an appendage of the machine, and it is only the most
simple, most monotonous, and most easily acquired knack, that is
required of him.  Hence, the cost of production of a workman is
restricted, almost entirely, to the means of subsistence that he
requires for his maintenance, and for the propagation of his
race.  But the price of a commodity, and therefore also of
labour, is equal to its cost of production.  In proportion
therefore, as the repulsiveness of the work increases, the wage
decreases.  Nay more, in proportion as the use of machinery and
division of labour increases, in the same proportion the burden
of toil also increases, whether by prolongation of the working
hours, by increase of the work exacted in a given time or by
increased speed of the machinery, etc.

Modern industry has converted the little workshop of the
patriarchal master into the great factory of the industrial
capitalist.  Masses of labourers, crowded into the factory, are
organised like soldiers.  As privates of the industrial army they
are placed under the command of a perfect hierarchy of officers
and sergeants.  Not only are they slaves of the bourgeois class,
and of the bourgeois State; they are daily and hourly enslaved by
the machine, by the over-looker, and, above all, by the
individual bourgeois manufacturer himself.  The more openly this
despotism proclaims gain to be its end and aim, the more petty,
the more hateful and the more embittering it is.

The less the skill and exertion of strength implied in manual
labour, in other words, the more modern industry becomes
developed, the more is the labour of men superseded by that of
women. Differences of age and sex have no longer any distinctive
social validity for the working class. All are instruments of
labour, more or less expensive to use, according to their age
and sex.

No sooner is the exploitation of the labourer by the manufacturer,
so far at an end, that he receives his wages in cash, than he is
set upon by the other portions of the bourgeoisie, the landlord,
the shopkeeper, the pawnbroker, etc.

The lower strata of the middle class--the small tradespeople,
shopkeepers, retired tradesmen generally, the handicraftsmen and
peasants--all these sink gradually into the proletariat, partly
because their diminutive capital does not suffice for the scale
on which Modern Industry is carried on, and is swamped in the
competition with the large capitalists, partly because their
specialized skill is rendered worthless by the new methods of
production.  Thus the proletariat is recruited from all classes
of the population.

The proletariat goes through various stages of development.
With its birth begins its struggle with the bourgeoisie.  At
first the contest is carried on by individual labourers, then by
the workpeople of a factory, then by the operatives of one trade,
in one locality, against the individual bourgeois who directly
exploits them.  They direct their attacks not against the
bourgeois conditions of production, but against the instruments
of production themselves; they destroy imported wares that
compete with their labour, they smash to pieces machinery, they
set factories ablaze, they seek to restore by force the vanished
status of the workman of the Middle Ages.

At this stage the labourers still form an incoherent mass
scattered over the whole country, and broken up by their mutual
competition.  If anywhere they unite to form more compact bodies,
this is not yet the consequence of their own active union, but of
the union of the bourgeoisie, which class, in order to attain its
own political ends, is compelled to set the whole proletariat in
motion, and is moreover yet, for a time, able to do so.  At this
stage, therefore, the proletarians do not fight their enemies,
but the enemies of their enemies, the remnants of absolute
monarchy, the landowners, the non-industrial bourgeois, the petty
bourgeoisie.  Thus the whole historical movement is concentrated
in the hands of the bourgeoisie; every victory so obtained is a
victory for the bourgeoisie.

But with the development of industry the proletariat not only
increases in number; it becomes concentrated in greater masses,
its strength grows, and it feels that strength more.  The various
interests and conditions of life within the ranks of the
proletariat are more and more equalised, in proportion as
machinery obliterates all distinctions of labour, and nearly
everywhere reduces wages to the same low level.  The growing
competition among the bourgeois, and the resulting commercial
crises, make the wages of the workers ever more fluctuating.  The
unceasing improvement of machinery, ever more rapidly developing,
makes their livelihood more and more precarious; the collisions
between individual workmen and individual bourgeois take more and
more the character of collisions between two classes.  Thereupon
the workers begin to form combinations (Trades Unions) against
the bourgeois; they club together in order to keep up the rate of
wages; they found permanent associations in order to make
provision beforehand for these occasional revolts.  Here and
there the contest breaks out into riots.

Now and then the workers are victorious, but only for a time.
The real fruit of their battles lies, not in the immediate
result, but in the ever-expanding union of the workers.  This
union is helped on by the improved means of communication that
are created by modern industry and that place the workers of
different localities in contact with one another.  It was just
this contact that was needed to centralise the numerous local
struggles, all of the same character, into one national struggle
between classes.  But every class struggle is a political
struggle.  And that union, to attain which the burghers of the
Middle Ages, with their miserable highways, required centuries,
the modern proletarians, thanks to railways, achieve in a few
years.

This organisation of the proletarians into a class, and
consequently into a political party, is continually being upset
again by the competition between the workers themselves.  But it
ever rises up again, stronger, firmer, mightier.  It compels
legislative recognition of particular interests of the workers,
by taking advantage of the divisions among the bourgeoisie
itself.  Thus the ten-hours' bill in England was carried.

Altogether collisions between the classes of the old society
further, in many ways, the course of development of the
proletariat. The bourgeoisie finds itself involved in a constant
battle. At first with the aristocracy; later on, with those
portions of the bourgeoisie itself, whose interests have become
antagonistic to the progress of industry; at all times, with the
bourgeoisie of foreign countries. In all these battles it sees
itself compelled to appeal to the proletariat, to ask for its
help, and thus, to drag it into the political arena. The
bourgeoisie itself, therefore, supplies the proletariat with its
own instruments of political and general education, in other
words, it furnishes the proletariat with weapons for fighting
the bourgeoisie.

Further, as we have already seen, entire sections of the ruling
classes are, by the advance of industry, precipitated into the
proletariat, or are at least threatened in their conditions of
existence.  These also supply the proletariat with fresh elements
of enlightenment and progress.

Finally, in times when the class struggle nears the decisive
hour, the process of dissolution going on within the ruling
class, in fact within the whole range of society, assumes such a
violent, glaring character, that a small section of the ruling
class cuts itself adrift, and joins the revolutionary class, the
class that holds the future in its hands.  Just as, therefore, at
an earlier period, a section of the nobility went over to the
bourgeoisie, so now a portion of the bourgeoisie goes over to the
proletariat, and in particular, a portion of the bourgeois
ideologists, who have raised themselves to the level of
comprehending theoretically the historical movement as a whole.

Of all the classes that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie
today, the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class.
The other classes decay and finally disappear in the face of
Modern Industry; the proletariat is its special and essential
product.  The lower middle class, the small manufacturer, the
shopkeeper, the artisan, the peasant, all these fight against the
bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their existence as fractions
of the middle class.  They are therefore not revolutionary, but
conservative.  Nay more, they are reactionary, for they try
to roll back the wheel of history.  If by chance they are
revolutionary, they are so only in view of their impending
transfer into the proletariat, they thus defend not their
present, but their future interests, they desert their own
standpoint to place themselves at that of the proletariat.

The "dangerous class," the social scum, that passively rotting
mass thrown off by the lowest layers of old society, may,
here and there, be swept into the movement by a proletarian
revolution; its conditions of life, however, prepare it far more
for the part of a bribed tool of reactionary intrigue.

In the conditions of the proletariat, those of old society at
large are already virtually swamped.  The proletarian is without
property; his relation to his wife and children has no longer
anything in common with the bourgeois family-relations; modern
industrial labour, modern subjection to capital, the same in
England as in France, in America as in Germany, has stripped him
of every trace of national character.  Law, morality, religion,
are to him so many bourgeois prejudices, behind which lurk in
ambush just as many bourgeois interests.

All the preceding classes that got the upper hand, sought to
fortify their already acquired status by subjecting society at
large to their conditions of appropriation.  The proletarians
cannot become masters of the productive forces of society, except
by abolishing their own previous mode of appropriation, and
thereby also every other previous mode of appropriation.  They
have nothing of their own to secure and to fortify; their mission
is to destroy all previous securities for, and insurances of,
individual property.

All previous historical movements were movements of minorities,
or in the interests of minorities.  The proletarian movement is
the self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority,
in the interests of the immense majority.  The proletariat, the
lowest stratum of our present society, cannot stir, cannot raise
itself up, without the whole superincumbent strata of official
society being sprung into the air.

Though not in substance, yet in form, the struggle of the
proletariat with the bourgeoisie is at first a national struggle.
The proletariat of each country must, of course, first of all
settle matters with its own bourgeoisie.

In depicting the most general phases of the development of the
proletariat, we traced the more or less veiled civil war, raging
within existing society, up to the point where that war breaks
out into open revolution, and where the violent overthrow of the
bourgeoisie lays the foundation for the sway of the proletariat.

Hitherto, every form of society has been based, as we have
already seen, on the antagonism of oppressing and oppressed
classes.  But in order to oppress a class, certain conditions
must be assured to it under which it can, at least, continue its
slavish existence.  The serf, in the period of serfdom, raised
himself to membership in the commune, just as the petty
bourgeois, under the yoke of feudal absolutism, managed to
develop into a bourgeois.  The modern laborer, on the contrary,
instead of rising with the progress of industry, sinks deeper and
deeper below the conditions of existence of his own class.  He
becomes a pauper, and pauperism develops more rapidly than
population and wealth.  And here it becomes evident, that the
bourgeoisie is unfit any longer to be the ruling class in
society, and to impose its conditions of existence upon society
as an over-riding law.  It is unfit to rule because it is
incompetent to assure an existence to its slave within his
slavery, because it cannot help letting him sink into such a
state, that it has to feed him, instead of being fed by him.
Society can no longer live under this bourgeoisie, in other
words, its existence is no longer compatible with society.

The essential condition for the existence, and for the sway of
the bourgeois class, is the formation and augmentation of
capital; the condition for capital is wage-labour.  Wage-labour
rests exclusively on competition between the laborers.  The
advance of industry, whose involuntary promoter is the bourgeoisie,
replaces the isolation of the labourers, due to competition,
by their revolutionary combination, due to association.  The
development of Modern Industry, therefore, cuts from under its
feet the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces and
appropriates products.  What the bourgeoisie, therefore, produces,
above all, is its own grave-diggers.  Its fall and the victory of
the proletariat are equally inevitable.



II.  PROLETARIANS AND COMMUNISTS

In what relation do the Communists stand to the proletarians as a
whole?

The Communists do not form a separate party opposed to other
working-class parties.

They have no interests separate and apart from those of the
proletariat as a whole.

They do not set up any sectarian principles of their own,
by which to shape and mould the proletarian movement.

The Communists are distinguished from the other working-class parties
by this only: (1) In the national struggles of the proletarians
of the different countries, they point out and bring to the front
the common interests of the entire proletariat, independently of
all nationality.  (2) In the various stages of development which the
struggle of the working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass
through, they always and everywhere represent the interests of the
movement as a whole.

The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically,
the most advanced and resolute section of the working-class
parties of every country, that section which pushes forward
all others; on the other hand, theoretically, they have over
the great mass of the proletariat the advantage of clearly
understanding the line of march, the conditions, and the ultimate
general results of the proletarian movement.

The immediate aim of the Communist is the same as that of all
the other proletarian parties: formation of the proletariat into
a class, overthrow of the bourgeois supremacy, conquest of
political power by the proletariat.

The theoretical conclusions of the Communists are in no way
based on ideas or principles that have been invented, or
discovered, by this or that would-be universal reformer.  They
merely express, in general terms, actual relations springing from
an existing class struggle, from a historical movement going on
under our very eyes.  The abolition of existing property
relations is not at all a distinctive feature of Communism.

All property relations in the past have continually been subject
to historical change consequent upon the change in historical
conditions.

The French Revolution, for example, abolished feudal property in
favour of bourgeois property.

The distinguishing feature of Communism is not the abolition of
property generally, but the abolition of bourgeois property. But
modern bourgeois private property is the final and most complete
expression of the system of producing and appropriating products,
that is based on class antagonisms, on the exploitation of the
many by the few.

In this sense, the theory of the Communists may be summed up in
the single sentence: Abolition of private property.

We Communists have been reproached with the desire of abolishing
the right of personally acquiring property as the fruit of a
man's own labour, which property is alleged to be the groundwork
of all personal freedom, activity and independence.

Hard-won, self-acquired, self-earned property!  Do you mean the
property of the petty artisan and of the small peasant, a form of
property that preceded the bourgeois form?  There is no need to
abolish that; the development of industry has to a great extent
already destroyed it, and is still destroying it daily.

Or do you mean modern bourgeois private property?

But does wage-labour create any property for the labourer?  Not
a bit.  It creates capital, i.e., that kind of property which
exploits wage-labour, and which cannot increase except upon
condition of begetting a new supply of wage-labour for fresh
exploitation.  Property, in its present form, is based on the
antagonism of capital and wage-labour.  Let us examine both sides
of this antagonism.

To be a capitalist, is to have not only a purely personal, but a
social status in production.  Capital is a collective product,
and only by the united action of many members, nay, in the last
resort, only by the united action of all members of society,
can it be set in motion.

Capital is, therefore, not a personal, it is a social power.

When, therefore, capital is converted into common property, into
the property of all members of society, personal property is not
thereby transformed into social property. It is only the social
character of the property that is changed. It loses its
class-character.

Let us now take wage-labour.

The average price of wage-labour is the minimum wage, i.e.,
that quantum of the means of subsistence, which is absolutely
requisite in bare existence as a labourer.  What, therefore, the
wage-labourer appropriates by means of his labour, merely
suffices to prolong and reproduce a bare existence.  We by no
means intend to abolish this personal appropriation of the
products of labour, an appropriation that is made for the
maintenance and reproduction of human life, and that leaves no
surplus wherewith to command the labour of others.  All that we
want to do away with, is the miserable character of this
appropriation, under which the labourer lives merely to increase
capital, and is allowed to live only in so far as the interest of
the ruling class requires it.

In bourgeois society, living labour is but a means to increase
accumulated labour.  In Communist society, accumulated labour
is but a means to widen, to enrich, to promote the existence
of the labourer.

In bourgeois society, therefore, the past dominates the present;
in Communist society, the present dominates the past.  In
bourgeois society capital is independent and has individuality,
while the living person is dependent and has no individuality.

And the abolition of this state of things is called by the
bourgeois, abolition of individuality and freedom! And rightly
so. The abolition of bourgeois individuality, bourgeois
independence, and bourgeois freedom is undoubtedly aimed at.

By freedom is meant, under the present bourgeois conditions of
production, free trade, free selling and buying.

But if selling and buying disappears, free selling and buying
disappears also.  This talk about free selling and buying, and
all the other "brave words" of our bourgeoisie about freedom in
general, have a meaning, if any, only in contrast with restricted
selling and buying, with the fettered traders of the Middle Ages,
but have no meaning when opposed to the Communistic abolition of
buying and selling, of the bourgeois conditions of production,
and of the bourgeoisie itself.

You are horrified at our intending to do away with private
property.  But in your existing society, private property is
already done away with for nine-tenths of the population; its
existence for the few is solely due to its non-existence in the
hands of those nine-tenths.  You reproach us, therefore, with
intending to do away with a form of property, the necessary
condition for whose existence is the non-existence of any
property for the immense majority of society.

In one word, you reproach us with intending to do away with your
property.  Precisely so; that is just what we intend.

From the moment when labour can no longer be converted into
capital, money, or rent, into a social power capable of being
monopolised, i.e., from the moment when individual property can
no longer be transformed into bourgeois property, into capital,
from that moment, you say individuality vanishes.

You must, therefore, confess that by "individual" you mean no
other person than the bourgeois, than the middle-class owner of
property.  This person must, indeed, be swept out of the way, and
made impossible.

Communism deprives no man of the power to appropriate the
products of society; all that it does is to deprive him of the
power to subjugate the labour of others by means of such
appropriation.

It has been objected that upon the abolition of private property
all work will cease, and universal laziness will overtake us.

According to this, bourgeois society ought long ago to have gone
to the dogs through sheer idleness; for those of its members who
work, acquire nothing, and those who acquire anything, do not
work. The whole of this objection is but another expression of
the tautology: that there can no longer be any wage-labour when
there is no longer any capital.

All objections urged against the Communistic mode of producing
and appropriating material products, have, in the same way,
been urged against the Communistic modes of producing and
appropriating intellectual products.  Just as, to the bourgeois,
the disappearance of class property is the disappearance of
production itself, so the disappearance of class culture is to
him identical with the disappearance of all culture.

That culture, the loss of which he laments, is, for the enormous
majority, a mere training to act as a machine.

But don't wrangle with us so long as you apply, to our intended
abolition of bourgeois property, the standard of your bourgeois
notions of freedom, culture, law, etc.  Your very ideas are but
the outgrowth of the conditions of your bourgeois production and
bourgeois property, just as your jurisprudence is but the will of
your class made into a law for all, a will, whose essential
character and direction are determined by the economical
conditions of existence of your class.

The selfish misconception that induces you to transform into
eternal laws of nature and of reason, the social forms
springing from your present mode of production and form of
property--historical relations that rise and disappear in the
progress of production--this misconception you share with every
ruling class that has preceded you.  What you see clearly in the
case of ancient property, what you admit in the case of feudal
property, you are of course forbidden to admit in the case of
your own bourgeois form of property.

Abolition of the family!  Even the most radical flare up at this
infamous proposal of the Communists.

On what foundation is the present family, the bourgeois family,
based?  On capital, on private gain.  In its completely developed
form this family exists only among the bourgeoisie.  But this
state of things finds its complement in the practical absence of
the family among the proletarians, and in public prostitution.

The bourgeois family will vanish as a matter of course when its
complement vanishes, and both will vanish with the vanishing of
capital.

Do you charge us with wanting to stop the exploitation of
children by their parents?  To this crime we plead guilty.

But, you will say, we destroy the most hallowed of relations,
when we replace home education by social.

And your education!  Is not that also social, and determined by the
social conditions under which you educate, by the intervention,
direct or indirect, of society, by means of schools, etc.?  The
Communists have not invented the intervention of society in
education; they do but seek to alter the character of that
intervention, and to rescue education from the influence of the
ruling class.

The bourgeois clap-trap about the family and education, about
the hallowed co-relation of parent and child, becomes all the
more disgusting, the more, by the action of Modern Industry, all
family ties among the proletarians are torn asunder, and their
children transformed into simple articles of commerce and
instruments of labour.

But you Communists would introduce community of women, screams
the whole bourgeoisie in chorus.

The bourgeois sees in his wife a mere instrument of production.
He hears that the instruments of production are to be exploited
in common, and, naturally, can come to no other conclusion than
that the lot of being common to all will likewise fall to the
women.

He has not even a suspicion that the real point is to do away
with the status of women as mere instruments of production.

For the rest, nothing is more ridiculous than the
virtuous indignation of our bourgeois at the community of women
which, they pretend, is to be openly and officially established
by the Communists.  The Communists have no need to introduce
community of women; it has existed almost from time immemorial.

Our bourgeois, not content with having the wives and daughters
of their proletarians at their disposal, not to speak of common
prostitutes, take the greatest pleasure in seducing each other's
wives.

Bourgeois marriage is in reality a system of wives in common
and thus, at the most, what the Communists might possibly
be reproached with, is that they desire to introduce, in
substitution for a hypocritically concealed, an openly legalised
community of women. For the rest, it is self-evident that the
abolition of the present system of production must bring with it
the abolition of the community of women springing from that
system, i.e., of prostitution both public and private.

The Communists are further reproached with desiring to abolish
countries and nationality.

The working men have no country.  We cannot take from them what
they have not got.  Since the proletariat must first of all
acquire political supremacy, must rise to be the leading class of
the nation, must constitute itself the nation, it is, so far,
itself national, though not in the bourgeois sense of the word.

National differences and antagonisms between peoples are daily
more and more vanishing, owing to the development of the
bourgeoisie, to freedom of commerce, to the world-market, to
uniformity in the mode of production and in the conditions of
life corresponding thereto.

The supremacy of the proletariat will cause them to vanish still
faster. United action, of the leading civilised countries at
least, is one of the first conditions for the emancipation of
the proletariat.

In proportion as the exploitation of one individual by another
is put an end to, the exploitation of one nation by another will
also be put an end to.  In proportion as the antagonism between
classes within the nation vanishes, the hostility of one nation
to another will come to an end.

The charges against Communism made from a religious, a
philosophical, and, generally, from an ideological standpoint,
are not deserving of serious examination.

Does it require deep intuition to comprehend that man's ideas,
views and conceptions, in one word, man's consciousness, changes
with every change in the conditions of his material existence, in
his social relations and in his social life?

What else does the history of ideas prove, than that
intellectual production changes its character in proportion as
material production is changed? The ruling ideas of each age
have ever been the ideas of its ruling class.

When people speak of ideas that revolutionise society, they do
but express the fact, that within the old society, the elements
of a new one have been created, and that the dissolution of the
old ideas keeps even pace with the dissolution of the old
conditions of existence.

When the ancient world was in its last throes, the ancient
religions were overcome by Christianity.  When Christian ideas
succumbed in the 18th century to rationalist ideas, feudal
society fought its death battle with the then revolutionary
bourgeoisie.  The ideas of religious liberty and freedom of
conscience merely gave expression to the sway of free competition
within the domain of knowledge.

"Undoubtedly," it will be said, "religious, moral, philosophical
and juridical ideas have been modified in the course of
historical development.  But religion, morality philosophy,
political science, and law, constantly survived this change."

"There are, besides, eternal truths, such as Freedom, Justice,
etc. that are common to all states of society. But Communism
abolishes eternal truths, it abolishes all religion, and all
morality, instead of constituting them on a new basis; it
therefore acts in contradiction to all past historical experience."

What does this accusation reduce itself to?  The history of
all past society has consisted in the development of class
antagonisms, antagonisms that assumed different forms at
different epochs.

But whatever form they may have taken, one fact is common to all
past ages, viz., the exploitation of one part of society by the
other. No wonder, then, that the social consciousness of past
ages, despite all the multiplicity and variety it displays,
moves within certain common forms, or general ideas, which
cannot completely vanish except with the total disappearance of
class antagonisms.

The Communist revolution is the most radical rupture with
traditional property relations; no wonder that its development
involves the most radical rupture with traditional ideas.

But let us have done with the bourgeois objections to Communism.

We have seen above, that the first step in the revolution by the
working class, is to raise the proletariat to the position of
ruling as to win the battle of democracy.

The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by
degrees, all capital from the bourgeoisie, to centralise all
instruments of production in the hands of the State, i.e., of the
proletariat organised as the ruling class; and to increase the
total of productive forces as rapidly as possible.

Of course, in the beginning, this cannot be effected except by
means of despotic inroads on the rights of property, and on
the conditions of bourgeois production; by means of measures,
therefore, which appear economically insufficient and untenable,
but which, in the course of the movement, outstrip themselves,
necessitate further inroads upon the old social order, and are
unavoidable as a means of entirely revolutionising the mode of
production.

These measures will of course be different in different
countries.

Nevertheless in the most advanced countries, the following will
be pretty generally applicable.

1.  Abolition of property in land and application of all rents
    of land to public purposes.

2.  A heavy progressive or graduated income tax.

3.  Abolition of all right of inheritance.

4.  Confiscation of the property of all emigrants and rebels.

5.  Centralisation of credit in the hands of the State, by means
    of a national bank with State capital and an exclusive
    monopoly.

6.  Centralisation of the means of communication and transport
    in the hands of the State.

7.  Extension of factories and instruments of production owned by
    the State; the bringing into cultivation of waste-lands, and
    the improvement of the soil generally in accordance with a
    common plan.

8.  Equal liability of all to labour.  Establishment of
    industrial armies, especially for agriculture.

9.  Combination of agriculture with manufacturing industries;
    gradual abolition of the distinction between town and
    country, by a more equable distribution of the population
    over the country.

10. Free education for all children in public schools.
    Abolition of children's factory labour in its present form.
    Combination of education with industrial production, &c., &c.

When, in the course of development, class distinctions have
disappeared, and all production has been concentrated in the
hands of a vast association of the whole nation, the public power
will lose its political character.  Political power, properly so
called, is merely the organised power of one class for oppressing
another.  If the proletariat during its contest with the
bourgeoisie is compelled, by the force of circumstances, to
organise itself as a class, if, by means of a revolution, it
makes itself the ruling class, and, as such, sweeps away by force
the old conditions of production, then it will, along with these
conditions, have swept away the conditions for the existence of
class antagonisms and of classes generally, and will thereby have
abolished its own supremacy as a class.

In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and
class antagonisms, we shall have an association, in which
the free development of each is the condition for the free
development of all.



III.  SOCIALIST AND COMMUNIST LITERATURE


1. REACTIONARY SOCIALISM


A. Feudal Socialism

Owing to their historical position, it became the vocation of the
aristocracies of France and England to write pamphlets against
modern bourgeois society.  In the French revolution of July 1830,
and in the English reform agitation, these aristocracies again
succumbed to the hateful upstart.  Thenceforth, a serious political
contest was altogether out of the question.  A literary battle
alone remained possible.  But even in the domain of literature
the old cries of the restoration period had become impossible.

In order to arouse sympathy, the aristocracy were obliged to
lose sight, apparently, of their own interests, and to formulate
their indictment against the bourgeoisie in the interest of the
exploited working class alone.  Thus the aristocracy took their
revenge by singing lampoons on their new master, and whispering
in his ears sinister prophecies of coming catastrophe.

In this way arose Feudal Socialism: half lamentation, half
lampoon; half echo of the past, half menace of the future; at
times, by its bitter, witty and incisive criticism, striking the
bourgeoisie to the very heart's core; but always ludicrous in
its effect, through total incapacity to comprehend the march of
modern history.

The aristocracy, in order to rally the people to them, waved the
proletarian alms-bag in front for a banner.  But the people, so
often as it joined them, saw on their hindquarters the old feudal
coats of arms, and deserted with loud and irreverent laughter.

One section of the French Legitimists and "Young England"
exhibited this spectacle.

In pointing out that their mode of exploitation was different to
that of the bourgeoisie, the feudalists forget that they
exploited under circumstances and conditions that were quite
different, and that are now antiquated.  In showing that, under
their rule, the modern proletariat never existed, they forget
that the modern bourgeoisie is the necessary offspring of their
own form of society.

For the rest, so little do they conceal the reactionary
character of their criticism that their chief accusation against
the bourgeoisie amounts to this, that under the bourgeois regime
a class is being developed, which is destined to cut up root and
branch the old order of society.

What they upbraid the bourgeoisie with is not so much that it
creates a proletariat, as that it creates a revolutionary
proletariat.

In political practice, therefore, they join in all coercive
measures against the working class; and in ordinary life,
despite their high falutin phrases, they stoop to pick up the
golden apples dropped from the tree of industry, and to barter
truth, love, and honour for traffic in wool, beetroot-sugar, and
potato spirits.

As the parson has ever gone hand in hand with the landlord,
so has Clerical Socialism with Feudal Socialism.

Nothing is easier than to give Christian asceticism a Socialist
tinge. Has not Christianity declaimed against private property,
against marriage, against the State? Has it not preached in the
place of these, charity and poverty, celibacy and mortification
of the flesh, monastic life and Mother Church? Christian
Socialism is but the holy, water with which the priest consecrates
the heart-burnings of the aristocrat.


B. Petty-Bourgeois Socialism

The feudal aristocracy was not the only class that was ruined by
the bourgeoisie, not the only class whose conditions of existence
pined and perished in the atmosphere of modern bourgeois society.
The mediaeval burgesses and the small peasant proprietors were
the precursors of the modern bourgeoisie.  In those countries
which are but little developed, industrially and commercially,
these two classes still vegetate side by side with the rising
bourgeoisie.

In countries where modern civilisation has become fully
developed, a new class of petty bourgeois has been formed,
fluctuating between proletariat and bourgeoisie and ever renewing
itself as a supplementary part of bourgeois society.  The
individual members of this class, however, are being constantly
hurled down into the proletariat by the action of competition,
and, as modern industry develops, they even see the moment
approaching when they will completely disappear as an independent
section of modern society, to be replaced, in manufactures,
agriculture and commerce, by overlookers, bailiffs and shopmen.

In countries like France, where the peasants constitute far more
than half of the population, it was natural that writers who
sided with the proletariat against the bourgeoisie, should use,
in their criticism of the bourgeois regime, the standard of the
peasant and petty bourgeois, and from the standpoint of these
intermediate classes should take up the cudgels for the working
class.  Thus arose petty-bourgeois Socialism.  Sismondi was the
head of this school, not only in France but also in England.

This school of Socialism dissected with great acuteness the
contradictions in the conditions of modern production.  It laid
bare the hypocritical apologies of economists.  It proved,
incontrovertibly, the disastrous effects of machinery and
division of labour; the concentration of capital and land in a
few hands; overproduction and crises; it pointed out the
inevitable ruin of the petty bourgeois and peasant, the misery
of the proletariat, the anarchy in production, the crying
inequalities in the distribution of wealth, the industrial war of
extermination between nations, the dissolution of old moral
bonds, of the old family relations, of the old nationalities.

In its positive aims, however, this form of Socialism aspires
either to restoring the old means of production and of exchange,
and with them the old property relations, and the old society, or
to cramping the modern means of production and of exchange,
within the framework of the old property relations that have
been, and were bound to be, exploded by those means.  In either
case, it is both reactionary and Utopian.

Its last words are: corporate guilds for manufacture,
patriarchal relations in agriculture.

Ultimately, when stubborn historical facts had dispersed all
intoxicating effects of self-deception, this form of Socialism
ended in a miserable fit of the blues.


C. German, or "True," Socialism

The Socialist and Communist literature of France, a literature
that originated under the pressure of a bourgeoisie in power, and
that was the expression of the struggle against this power, was
introduced into Germany at a time when the bourgeoisie, in that
country, had just begun its contest with feudal absolutism.

German philosophers, would-be philosophers, and beaux esprits,
eagerly seized on this literature, only forgetting, that when
these writings immigrated from France into Germany, French social
conditions had not immigrated along with them.  In contact with
German social conditions, this French literature lost all its
immediate practical significance, and assumed a purely literary
aspect.  Thus, to the German philosophers of the eighteenth
century, the demands of the first French Revolution were nothing
more than the demands of "Practical Reason" in general, and the
utterance of the will of the revolutionary French bourgeoisie
signified in their eyes the law of pure Will, of Will as it was
bound to be, of true human Will generally.

The world of the German literate consisted solely in bringing
the new French ideas into harmony with their ancient philosophical
conscience, or rather, in annexing the French ideas without
deserting their own philosophic point of view.

This annexation took place in the same way in which a foreign
language is appropriated, namely, by translation.

It is well known how the monks wrote silly lives of Catholic
Saints over the manuscripts on which the classical works of
ancient heathendom had been written.  The German literate
reversed this process with the profane French literature.  They
wrote their philosophical nonsense beneath the French original.
For instance, beneath the French criticism of the economic
functions of money, they wrote "Alienation of Humanity," and
beneath the French criticism of the bourgeois State they wrote
"dethronement of the Category of the General," and so forth.

The introduction of these philosophical phrases at the back of
the French historical criticisms they dubbed "Philosophy of
Action," "True Socialism," "German Science of Socialism,"
"Philosophical Foundation of Socialism," and so on.

The French Socialist and Communist literature was thus completely
emasculated. And, since it ceased in the hands of the German to express
the struggle of one class with the other, he felt conscious of having
overcome "French one-sidedness" and of representing, not true
requirements, but the requirements of truth; not the interests of the
proletariat, but the interests of Human Nature, of Man in general, who
belongs to no class, has no reality, who exists only in the misty realm
of philosophical fantasy.

This German Socialism, which took its schoolboy task so seriously
and solemnly, and extolled its poor stock-in-trade in such
mountebank fashion, meanwhile gradually lost its pedantic
innocence.

The fight of the German, and especially, of the Prussian bourgeoisie,
against feudal aristocracy and absolute monarchy, in other words, the
liberal movement, became more earnest.

By this, the long wished-for opportunity was offered to "True"
Socialism of confronting the political movement with the
Socialist demands, of hurling the traditional anathemas
against liberalism, against representative government, against
bourgeois competition, bourgeois freedom of the press, bourgeois
legislation, bourgeois liberty and equality, and of preaching to
the masses that they had nothing to gain, and everything to lose,
by this bourgeois movement.  German Socialism forgot, in the nick
of time, that the French criticism, whose silly echo it was,
presupposed the existence of modern bourgeois society, with its
corresponding economic conditions of existence, and the political
constitution adapted thereto, the very things whose attainment
was the object of the pending struggle in Germany.

To the absolute governments, with their following of parsons,
professors, country squires and officials, it served as a welcome
scarecrow against the threatening bourgeoisie.

It was a sweet finish after the bitter pills of floggings and
bullets with which these same governments, just at that time,
dosed the German working-class risings.

While this "True" Socialism thus served the governments as a
weapon for fighting the German bourgeoisie, it, at the same time,
directly represented a reactionary interest, the interest of the
German Philistines.  In Germany the petty-bourgeois class, a
relic of the sixteenth century, and since then constantly
cropping up again under various forms, is the real social basis
of the existing state of things.

To preserve this class is to preserve the existing state of
things in Germany.  The industrial and political supremacy of the
bourgeoisie threatens it with certain destruction; on the one
hand, from the concentration of capital; on the other, from the
rise of a revolutionary proletariat.  "True" Socialism appeared to
kill these two birds with one stone.  It spread like an epidemic.

The robe of speculative cobwebs, embroidered with flowers
of rhetoric, steeped in the dew of sickly sentiment, this
transcendental robe in which the German Socialists wrapped their
sorry "eternal truths," all skin and bone, served to wonderfully
increase the sale of their goods amongst such a public.  And on
its part, German Socialism recognised, more and more, its own
calling as the bombastic representative of the petty-bourgeois
Philistine.

It proclaimed the German nation to be the model nation, and the
German petty Philistine to be the typical man.  To every
villainous meanness of this model man it gave a hidden, higher,
Socialistic interpretation, the exact contrary of its real
character.  It went to the extreme length of directly opposing
the "brutally destructive" tendency of Communism, and of
proclaiming its supreme and impartial contempt of all class
struggles.  With very few exceptions, all the so-called Socialist
and Communist publications that now (1847) circulate in Germany
belong to the domain of this foul and enervating literature.


2. CONSERVATIVE, OR BOURGEOIS, SOCIALISM

A part of the bourgeoisie is desirous of redressing social
grievances, in order to secure the continued existence of
bourgeois society.

To this section belong economists, philanthropists,
humanitarians, improvers of the condition of the working class,
organisers of charity, members of societies for the prevention of
cruelty to animals, temperance fanatics, hole-and-corner
reformers of every imaginable kind.  This form of Socialism has,
moreover, been worked out into complete systems.

We may cite Proudhon's Philosophie de la Misere as an example of
this form.

The Socialistic bourgeois want all the advantages of modern
social conditions without the struggles and dangers necessarily
resulting therefrom.  They desire the existing state of society
minus its revolutionary and disintegrating elements.  They wish
for a bourgeoisie without a proletariat.  The bourgeoisie
naturally conceives the world in which it is supreme to be the
best; and bourgeois Socialism develops this comfortable
conception into various more or less complete systems.  In
requiring the proletariat to carry out such a system, and thereby
to march straightway into the social New Jerusalem, it but
requires in reality, that the proletariat should remain within
the bounds of existing society, but should cast away all its
hateful ideas concerning the bourgeoisie.

A second and more practical, but less systematic, form of this
Socialism sought to depreciate every revolutionary movement in
the eyes of the working class, by showing that no mere political
reform, but only a change in the material conditions of
existence, in economic relations, could be of any advantage to
them.  By changes in the material conditions of existence, this
form of Socialism, however, by no means understands abolition of
the bourgeois relations of production, an abolition that can be
effected only by a revolution, but administrative reforms, based
on the continued existence of these relations; reforms,
therefore, that in no respect affect the relations between
capital and labour, but, at the best, lessen the cost, and
simplify the administrative work, of bourgeois government.

Bourgeois Socialism attains adequate expression, when, and only
when, it becomes a mere figure of speech.

Free trade: for the benefit of the working class.  Protective
duties: for the benefit of the working class.  Prison Reform: for
the benefit of the working class.  This is the last word and the
only seriously meant word of bourgeois Socialism.

It is summed up in the phrase: the bourgeois is a bourgeois--for
the benefit of the working class.


3.  CRITICAL-UTOPIAN SOCIALISM AND COMMUNISM

We do not here refer to that literature which, in every great
modern revolution, has always given voice to the demands of the
proletariat, such as the writings of Babeuf and others.

The first direct attempts of the proletariat to attain its own
ends, made in times of universal excitement, when feudal society
was being overthrown, these attempts necessarily failed, owing
to the then undeveloped state of the proletariat, as well as to
the absence of the economic conditions for its emancipation,
conditions that had yet to be produced, and could be produced
by the impending bourgeois epoch alone. The revolutionary
literature that accompanied these first movements of the
proletariat had necessarily a reactionary character. It
inculcated universal asceticism and social levelling in its
crudest form.

The Socialist and Communist systems properly so called, those of
Saint-Simon, Fourier, Owen and others, spring into existence in
the early undeveloped period, described above, of the struggle
between proletariat and bourgeoisie (see Section 1. Bourgeois
and Proletarians).

The founders of these systems see, indeed, the class antagonisms, as
well as the action of the decomposing elements, in the prevailing form
of society. But the proletariat, as yet in its infancy, offers to them
the spectacle of a class without any historical initiative or any
independent political movement.

Since the development of class antagonism keeps even pace with
the development of industry, the economic situation, as they find
it, does not as yet offer to them the material conditions for the
emancipation of the proletariat.  They therefore search after a
new social science, after new social laws, that are to create
these conditions.

Historical action is to yield to their personal inventive
action, historically created conditions of emancipation to
fantastic ones, and the gradual, spontaneous class-organisation
of the proletariat to the organisation of society specially
contrived by these inventors.  Future history resolves itself, in
their eyes, into the propaganda and the practical carrying out of
their social plans.

In the formation of their plans they are conscious of caring
chiefly for the interests of the working class, as being the most
suffering class.  Only from the point of view of being the most
suffering class does the proletariat exist for them.

The undeveloped state of the class struggle, as well as their
own surroundings, causes Socialists of this kind to consider
themselves far superior to all class antagonisms.  They want to
improve the condition of every member of society, even that of
the most favoured.  Hence, they habitually appeal to society at
large, without  distinction of class; nay, by preference, to the
ruling class.  For how can people, when once they understand
their system, fail to see in it the best possible plan of the
best possible state of society?

Hence, they reject all political, and especially all
revolutionary, action; they wish to attain their ends by
peaceful means, and endeavour, by small experiments, necessarily
doomed to failure, and by the force of example, to pave the way
for the new social Gospel.

Such fantastic pictures of future society, painted at a time
when the proletariat is still in a very undeveloped state and has
but a fantastic conception of its own position correspond with
the first instinctive yearnings of that class for a general
reconstruction of society.

But these Socialist and Communist publications contain also a
critical element. They attack every principle of existing society.
Hence they are full of the most valuable materials for the
enlightenment of the working class. The practical measures
proposed in them--such as the abolition of the distinction
between town and country, of the family, of the carrying on of
industries for the account of private individuals, and of the wage
system, the proclamation of social harmony, the conversion of the
functions of the State into a mere superintendence of production,
all these proposals, point solely to the disappearance of class
antagonisms which were, at that time, only just cropping up, and
which, in these publications, are recognised in their earliest,
indistinct and undefined forms only. These proposals, therefore,
are of a purely Utopian character.

The significance of Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism
bears an inverse relation to historical development.  In
proportion as the modern class struggle develops and takes
definite shape, this fantastic standing apart from the contest,
these fantastic attacks on it, lose all practical value and all
theoretical justification.  Therefore, although the originators
of these systems were, in many respects, revolutionary, their
disciples have, in every case, formed mere reactionary sects.
They hold fast by the original views of their masters, in
opposition to the progressive historical development of the
proletariat.  They, therefore, endeavour, and that consistently,
to deaden the class struggle and to reconcile the class antagonisms.
They still dream of experimental realisation of their social
Utopias, of founding isolated "phalansteres," of establishing
"Home Colonies,"  of setting up a "Little Icaria"--duodecimo
editions of the New Jerusalem--and to realise all these castles
in the air, they are compelled to appeal to the feelings and
purses of the bourgeois.  By degrees they sink into the category
of the reactionary conservative Socialists depicted above,
differing from these only by more systematic pedantry, and
by their fanatical and superstitious belief in the miraculous
effects of their social science.

They, therefore, violently oppose all political action on the
part of the working class; such action, according to them, can
only result from blind unbelief in the new Gospel.

The Owenites in England, and the Fourierists in France,
respectively, oppose the Chartists and the Reformistes.



IV.  POSITION OF THE COMMUNISTS IN RELATION TO THE
VARIOUS EXISTING OPPOSITION PARTIES

Section II has made clear the relations of the Communists to the
existing working-class parties, such as the Chartists in England
and the Agrarian Reformers in America.

The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims,
for the enforcement of the momentary interests of the working
class; but in the movement of the present, they also represent
and take care of the future of that movement.  In France the
Communists ally themselves with the Social-Democrats, against the
conservative and radical bourgeoisie, reserving, however, the
right to take up a critical position in regard to phrases and
illusions traditionally handed down from the great Revolution.

In Switzerland they support the Radicals, without losing sight
of the fact that this party consists of antagonistic elements,
partly of Democratic Socialists, in the French sense, partly of
radical bourgeois.

In Poland they support the party that insists on an agrarian
revolution as the prime condition for national emancipation, that
party which fomented the insurrection of Cracow in 1846.

In Germany they fight with the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a
revolutionary way, against the absolute monarchy, the feudal
squirearchy, and the petty bourgeoisie.

But they never cease, for a single instant, to instil into the
working class the clearest possible recognition of the hostile
antagonism between bourgeoisie and proletariat, in order that the
German workers may straightaway use, as so many weapons against
the bourgeoisie, the social and political conditions that the
bourgeoisie must necessarily introduce along with its supremacy,
and in order that, after the fall of the reactionary classes in
Germany, the fight against the bourgeoisie itself may immediately
begin.

The Communists turn their attention chiefly to Germany, because
that country is on the eve of a bourgeois revolution that
is bound to be carried out under more advanced conditions
of European civilisation, and with a much more developed
proletariat, than that of England was in the seventeenth, and of
France in the eighteenth century, and because the bourgeois
revolution in Germany will be but the prelude to an immediately
following proletarian revolution.

In short, the Communists everywhere support every revolutionary
movement against the existing social and political order of
things.

In all these movements they bring to the front, as the leading
question in each, the property question, no matter what its
degree of development at the time.

Finally, they labour everywhere for the union and agreement of
the democratic parties of all countries.

The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims.
They openly declare that their ends can be attained only by
the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions.
Let the ruling classes tremble at a Communistic revolution.
The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains.
They have a world to win.


           WORKING MEN OF ALL COUNTRIES, UNITE!








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Communist Manifesto
by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMMUNIST MANIFESTO ***

***** This file should be named 61.txt or 61.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/6/61/

Transcribed by Allen Lutins with assistance from Jim Tarzia.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

﻿
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75909 ***





                    _NAT RIDLEY DETECTIVE STORIES_

                           THE DOUBLE DAGGER

                                  or

                      Nat Ridley's Mexican Trail

                          By Nat Ridley, Jr.

       _Author of "Guilty or Not Guilty," "A Daring Abduction,"
                     "A Scream in the Dark," etc._

                       GARDEN CITY     NEW YORK
                   GARDEN CITY PUBLISHING CO., INC.

                                 1926

                NAT RIDLEY RAPID FIRE DETECTIVE STORIES

                          BY NAT RIDLEY, JR.,

                          Copyright, 1926, by
                   GARDEN CITY PUBLISHING CO., INC.

                           THE DOUBLE DAGGER

                           MADE IN U. S. A.




                               CONTENTS

                          I. A CALL FOR HELP

                         II. THE DOUBLE DAGGER

                        III. ANOTHER MURDER

                         IV. AN ORDER TO RAMON

                          V. THE ROPE IN THE DARK

                         VI. A CHANGE OF IDENTITIES

                        VII. LIGHTS OUT

                       VIII. HALF A COAT

                         IX. THE WINDOW CLEANER

                          X. OFF TO TEXAS

                         XI. A FREE SPENDER

                        XII. EL CAPITAN

                       XIII. IN THE DUNGEON

                        XIV. THE BOMB

                         XV. IN HIDING

                        XVI. ON TO ROLAMOTAZA

                       XVII. INTO THE HILLS

                      XVIII. THE BLACK CAVE

                        XIX. PURSUED

                         XX. OVER THE CLIFF

                        XXI. A SHOT IN TIME

                       XXII. THE TOLA EMBLEM

                      XXIII. THE DEAF MUTE

                       XXIV. OVER THE LINE

                        XXV. THE WHISTLE




                           THE DOUBLE DAGGER




                               CHAPTER I

                            A CALL FOR HELP


With a vicious bang, which indicated that his thoughts were not on what
he was doing, Nat Ridley hung the receiver on the telephone hook. He
swung around in his swivel chair and looked out of the window of his
Times Square office at the hurrying throngs converging at Broadway and
Seventh Avenue.

"That's a new one, all right!" exclaimed the famous detective, more to
himself than to anyone else, though Berry Todd, his capable assistant,
was at a desk near by. "It sure is a new one! And to think that some of
those human ants down there may have had a hand in it!"

He leaned forward the better to see out of the window.

"What's that?" asked Berry, who was shuffling over some papers. "Whose
aunt are you talking about?"

"Nobody's aunt!" was Nat's reply. "I might just as well have said flies
or bugs--that's what they look like!" He waved his hand to the hurrying
throng--men and women mixed with automobiles.

"Oh--that bunch!" chuckled Berry. "Yes, there sure is a crowd. But is
anything wrong?" he went on, for he realized that the mere sight of
the crowd, almost always in evidence at this busy section of New York,
was no new one for his chief. "Anything wrong?" asked Berry again,
though in a lower voice, for he noted that the celebrated sleuth, whose
exploits were the talk of two continents, was gazing abstractedly at
the telephone.

"Yes, there is," snapped out Nat Ridley, though the crisp tone did not
indicate impatience with his helper's insistence. "I can't quite make
out why he should 'phone me."

"Who?" asked Berry, who was a privileged character.

"Carl Lemberg."

"That German sleuth?" cried Berry.

"He isn't as German as his name sounds," was Nat's reply. "Though of
course he has many of the earmarks. But why he should want me to come
in on one of his cases----"

"You don't mean to say he admits he's stuck, do you?" and Berry
laughed. "That's pretty good! Lemberg up a blind alley--at the end of
his trail--that's pretty good!"

The joke, if such it was, was all the more appreciated by Berry Todd,
for of all the private detectives in New York, Nat Ridley's chief rival
was this Carl Lemberg.

Yet Nat did not actually admit that Lemberg was a rival. It was only
other detectives, some in the Ridley offices, who were thus bold about
admitting the fact and, sometimes, complaining about it. For though
the chief said nothing, more than once he had heard of some rather
underhand practices on the part of Lemberg or the latter's helpers,
practices that took from Nat Ridley cases that netted large sums of
money.

But Nat Ridley was not one to complain, or even acknowledge that he had
a rival. He took the cases that came to him, and not always for money,
either. More than once he had worked day and night, and even endangered
his life, solving a mystery for the very love of getting to the bottom
of a tangle or for the sake of some friend.

Yet it could not be wholly ignored that Carl Lemberg was, in every
sense of the word, a business rival of Nat Ridley's.

"So he's squealing, is he?" asked Berry. "What's the game? What sort of
case has Lemberg that he can't solve, Chief?"

"He isn't exactly squealing, Berry," said Nat slowly, as he rose
from his chair, pushed it back, and began nervously to pace the small
private office. "He is in need of help."

"Then it's on a case, isn't it?" persisted Berry. "I'll bet a new straw
hat, and the season's just opening, too," he added, "that he fell down
on that Markwith jewelry robbery. They passed us up on that, Chief, and
went to Lemberg. Now he's stuck! Serves him darn good and right!"

"No, it isn't the Markwith case, Berry," said Nat.

"What then?"

"It's a sort of family affair."

"Oh, a scandal? Well, we don't go in for that sort of thing, do we?"

"You haven't quite got me, Berry," and Nat smiled. "It isn't that kind
of a case. Though it is a family matter for Lemberg. He's in need
of help and he turns to me. Urgent need he said just now, over the
telephone."

"Then it must be a big case!" declared Berry. "So much the better for
us. I'd rather he'd be stuck on a big case and have to turn it over to
us, than to have it a little jigger not worth bothering with. Want me
to do anything, Chief?"

Nat Ridley slowly indicated a negative by a shake of his head.

"It hasn't gotten to that stage yet," he said. "In fact, I don't know
what it is myself. I told him to come here and see me. Such matters
aren't for the telephone."

"Then you're going to help him?"

This time Nat nodded in the affirmative.

"Whew!" whistled Berry Todd.

And there was reason for his surprise, for in addition to the rivalry
existing between the two offices, there was a distinct feeling on Nat
Ridley's part against Lemberg. The noted sleuth did not speak of this,
but his friends and his office force knew of it.

Lemberg was too tricky, and Nat was out of sympathy with the manner in
which the German, as he was often called, got some of his cases. And
when Berry thought of that and heard his chief say he had agreed to
listen to what Lemberg had to say, it is no wonder Berry whistled.

"Will he be here soon?" asked Berry, as he began to gather up the
papers he was looking over. "If he will, I'd better light out. I was
getting up the report for you on that kidnapping case, but----"

"Let it go, Berry," was the order. "Lemberg will be here in about five
minutes, and he wants to see me alone. I'll let you and Baldy know what
I decide to do."

"Lemberg will be here in five minutes?" exclaimed Berry as he put the
papers in a portfolio and started for the door leading out of Nat's
private room. "How's he coming--by air-ship?" The office of the other
sleuth was down near Wall Street, several miles from Times Square.

"He is in our neighborhood," Nat went on. "He was so anxious to see me
that he rode up here, and is down in the Grand Central Terminal now.
He's coming up from there in a taxi."

"Well, I'll make myself scarce. But--you won't mind a word from an old
friend as well as from one of your workers, Chief?" Berry seemed very
anxious.

"Of course I won't!" declared Nat. "What is it?"

"Think twice before you have anything to do with Lemberg," was the low
reply. "He's no better than a snake in the grass in my opinion."

"An opinion I quite agree with at times, Berry," was the rejoinder.
"But I don't want to say I won't help him until I hear what he has to
say. Judging from his voice, he was in quite a stew."

"Serves him right!" muttered Berry as he went out.

In a few minutes, during which Nat continued to pace the office, an
electric buzzer near his desk signaled in a certain way.

"There he is!" murmured Nat, and, stepping to a button near the
signal, he pressed it, indicating to Toodles, the office boy in the
front office, that the chief would receive a visitor.

A moment later Carl Lemberg was ushered into Nat Ridley's private room.

In spite of the fact that he had lived all his life in the United
States, there was a typical German appearance about this detective. He
was massive in bulk and manner, and his voice, ordinarily, was loud and
booming. It was this voice, more times than one, fairly hurled at a
suspect, that had caused many to quail and confess.

Yet now Carl Lemberg was but a shadow of what he had been on occasions.
Instead of entering the office with a firm and confident tread, he
fairly slunk in, and he glanced from side to side, and once back of
him, in a manner denoting that he feared he might have been followed.

His usually ruddy face was pale and his large hands trembled as he took
a big linen handkerchief from his pocket and mopped his face.

"It is good of you to let me come, Ridley," began the visitor, with
no trace of accent, though he spoke German fluently and with a purity
seldom attained by those not born in Germany.

"I could do nothing less after what you said," rejoined the other.
"What is the matter?"

"Much!" was the reply, and again came that nervous look about and
behind. "Are we alone here?" he whispered.

"As much so as anyone is ever alone," was the reply, with a smile. "The
walls are sound proof--as yours are."

"Oh, yes--mine--of course! And yet they haven't seemed to keep my
secrets."

"What do you mean?" asked Nat.

"I--I wish I knew!" was the faltering reply. "I wish I knew!"

"Look here, Lemberg," exclaimed Nat with a brusk show of friendliness
he did not altogether feel, "you're all in! You're showing fear! It may
not be real, but----"

"I am afraid, Ridley! I am afraid!" was the quick reply. "I hardly dare
admit to myself how frightened I am. That is why I have come to you."

"You? Afraid?" chuckled Nat, half scoffing. "I can't believe it."

"It's true, I tell you!" fairly snarled the other. "I am in deadly
fear!"

"What of, in the name of all the police of New York?"

"I don't even know that. But it's terrible!"

There was no mistaking the man's terror. It showed in his voice, in
his eyes, in his actions. Nat Ridley was astonished. To himself he
murmured:

"The intrepid Carl Lemberg afraid? Am I dreaming?"

Aloud he said:

"You must have a reason for this fear. I suppose you came to tell
me--to get my help. And, if so----"

"Yes! Yes!" broke in the other detective. "You are ready to laugh at
me, I know. I feel it! I would not be surprised. Yet, you would be
afraid also if----"

He paused, startled by some noise unperceived by Nat.

"Well, what?" suggested the other. "I would be afraid if what?"

"If your brother had been murdered, and then your uncle and then your
chief assistant. I ask you, Nat Ridley, if you would not, also, have
fear under those circumstances? Would you----?"

At that instant the telephone on the desk jingled out an imperative
summons, and, coming, as it did, at such a dramatic moment, even Nat
Ridley was startled.




                              CHAPTER II

                           THE DOUBLE DAGGER


For a moment or two the telephone bell continued to sound its summons,
and both men stared at it. The German detective made a motion as though
to answer, and then, recollecting that he was not in his own office, he
stepped back with a mutter of impatience.

"Excuse me," murmured Nat as he picked up the instrument.

"Certainly."

To Nat's ears came the voice of Berry Todd in the latter's office near
the entrance to the sleuth's suite.

"All right, Chief?" asked Berry in guarded tones.

"All right about what?" Nat countered, for he did not get the drift of
the other's question.

Berry went on with:

"Excuse me, Chief, but I happened to notice that bird sliding into your
office, and I didn't like his looks. No names, you understand, but I
thought he looked desperate, and he might have suddenly gone batty, you
know, and might try to slip you a bomb, or something like that. How
about it? Need any help? Are you all right?"

"All right," Nat answered, hardly able to keep from chuckling at the
odd thought Berry had given voice to. The sleuth, who was very fond
of his chief in more than a business way, had noted, with more than a
little apprehension, the entrance of Lemberg.

Indeed Lemberg was acting very queerly, but Nat Ridley was not afraid
for himself, though he appreciated Berry's precaution.

"Quite all right," said Nat again, as he put the receiver on the hook.
"Sorry to have had to interrupt you," he went on to his visitor. "But,
being in the same line of business----"

"Oh, of course--yes. Perhaps I shouldn't have come in. But I could not
stand it any longer. Though if you have an urgent case----"

"There wouldn't seem to be any more urgent than your own," said Nat.
"This was only one of my men reporting. I am quite ready to hear you
further. Did I understand you to say that your brother and uncle had
been murdered?"

"That's it--foully murdered, Ridley! And now Dan Steele----"

"What?" cried Nat, startled out of his usual calmness. "You don't mean
to tell me Steele has been killed? How? When? Where? Why, Dan used to
work for me at one time."

"I know he did. A fine chap he is--was, I mean. When I got word that
the devils had put the sign on him I decided it was too much for me to
handle. And, knowing you had once hired Steele, I decided to come to
you."

"You had better sit down and tell me about it," suggested Nat, for, up
to this time, Lemberg had been pacing the office.

"It is a long story, but I will make it as short as possible," he said,
as he slumped, rather than sat, in a chair. Again he mopped his pale
and perspiring face. "You may not know it," went on Lemberg, "but I am
in the oil-well business."

"I had not heard it," stated Nat. "The venture must have been recently
made."

"It was. I would not have gone into it had not these murders forced it
upon me. For years, as you know, I have conducted a private detective
agency, just as you have."

Nat did not quite like the simile, for he would not admit that he
conducted the same sort of business as had Carl Lemberg. But Nat let
that pass, and the other went on:

"My brother, Henry, and my uncle, August, some years ago bought the
rights to several valuable oil properties in the neighborhood of
Rolamotaza, in Mexico. The wells turned out better than was expected,
and my uncle and brother decided to increase their holdings.

"Near their property were some wells belonging to a number of
Mexicans, who formed a sort of corporation for marketing the product
they pumped out of the earth. As is natural, where natural products are
so close together, there were frequent quarrels over mineral rights,
and matters got to such a point that my uncle and brother decided they
would either have to buy out their rivals or sell to them.

"Finally it settled to a matter of the former, and a deal was made by
which the Mexican firm transferred their rights, titles and interests
to my two relatives. The Mexicans were paid a large sum, all they
had demanded, as a matter of fact, and, getting the money, they
disappeared."

Lemberg paused again to mop his face.

"Nothing very remarkable in all this, so far," said Nat, who had been
jotting down some pencil characters on a paper. This had been observed
by his visitor who sharply asked:

"What are you doing?"

"Taking shorthand notes."

"Have you no stenographer?" the German inquired.

"Yes," and Nat smiled. "But there are some things I do not trust even
to my own stenographer. Proceed, if you please. You have yet to come to
the murders."

"I will come to them--never fear!" declared the other earnestly. "As I
said, the Mexicans, after their wells were bought, disappeared, but
some time later they came back."

"Why?"

"Because the properties they sold to my brother and uncle turned out
to be much more valuable than had been thought. In other words, much
oil began to spout in wells it was thought were running dry, and, as a
result, my uncle and brother began to grow very wealthy."

"And the Mexicans came back, I suppose," said Nat, "to get a share of
it?"

"Exactly. But as my relatives had paid all that was asked, and as
they had no knowledge that the wells would turn out better than was
supposed, they did not see why they should pay over any of their
profits."

"No, as a business proposition, they couldn't be expected to," Nat
agreed.

"And then came the murders!" exclaimed Lemberg suddenly.

"How?" cried Nat.

"One night, after several veiled threats had been made against my two
relatives, my brother Henry was found dead--there was a dagger in his
heart!"

"The Latin races run to knives," murmured Nat.

"A few days after that," went on Lemberg, "and following the receipt by
my uncle of an anonymous threat that if he did not share some of his
oil wealth with the former owners of the wells he would be killed, he,
too, was found dead."

"Murdered?"

"Murdered!"

"With a dagger?"

"With a dagger, just as my brother had been, and with the same sign."

"What do you mean--with the same sign?"

"This!" and the German sleuth took a little package from his coat
pocket. He opened it and spread the contents on Nat's desk. There were
two dirty cards, on one of which were tell-tale red stains, and each
card bore on one side the drawing, crudely done, of a double dagger.

The weapon seemed to consist of a middle handle, made of some sort of
twisted horn, or perhaps hard wood. One of the blades of the double
dagger was longer than the other, and both points were shown very keen
in the picture.

"Rather an odd weapon," commented Nat, taking up one of the cards by
the edges so as to leave no finger prints on those presumably already
there. "I think I have seen it before. Just a moment."

He turned to a large book case and opened the glass door.

"What are you going to do?" asked Lemberg.

"Look up this symbol--for a symbol I think it is."

"You are right," said the other. "As I said, it is a sign. But here is
one of the daggers," and from another pocket Lemberg took a small box
which he turned upside down on Nat's desk.

There was a metallic sound, and there tinkled out on the shining oak a
small dagger, exactly like the pictured one on the card, but so small
as to be useless as a weapon.

"It looks like a pin," commented Nat Ridley.

"It was used as a pin," the German said. "With these pins these cards
were fastened to the clothing of my brother and my uncle."

"I see," murmured Nat. He reached forward to pick up the murderous
little implement, but Lemberg caught his hand.

"The points may be poisoned," was the caution.

"They may be," admitted Nat. "I was going to exercise due caution,
Lemberg," he added, with a grim laugh. "But did your uncle and brother
die from the scratch of a poisoned weapon?"

"They may have, for all I know to the contrary, though from the report
of the police in Rolamotaza the cuts in their hearts brought death. If
there was poison used, it was to make assurance doubly sure. But it is
best to be cautious."

"You are right. So the cards, bearing the picture of this dagger, were
fastened on the dead men's clothing with pins made in the same shape.
Were the heart stabs made by the same sort of daggers, only larger?"

"That is the supposition. But I can save you time, Ridley. You were
going to look up this symbol?"

"Yes," admitted Nat. "I have some books on foreign secret societies. I
think I recognize this symbol. It is, I am sure----"

"The Tola," interrupted Lemberg. "I looked it up. Yes, it is an old
Mexican society, but it was supposed to have died out years ago."

"Then it has revived," stated Nat.

"Or else it never died. Well, to get on with my story. When I got
word of my brother's death, I started the police in Mexico after the
murderers. They did what they could--little enough--and while I was
waiting their report, my uncle went the same way.

"Then I acted quickly, and sent my best man down to Paloma, Texas, with
orders to cross into Mexico and see if he could round up these oil-well
killers."

"He went, I suppose?" suggested Nat.

Lemberg bowed gravely.

"But he never came back," he said. "Dan Steele was murdered in Paloma
in the same way my brother and uncle had been killed--with a dagger
thrust in his heart, and this card pinned on his breast. Do you wonder
I am afraid, Ridley?"

"Not after that," was the answer. "But what form does your fear take?"

"A fear for myself. I have reason to believe they will kill me
next--those mysterious murderers of the Tola!" and, with a shaking
hand, Carl Lemberg again mopped his face.




                              CHAPTER III

                            ANOTHER MURDER


Nat Ridley was accustomed to seeing strong men exhibit fear under
many circumstances. Sometimes it was a fear over the consequences of
the crimes the detective had fastened on them. Again it might be a
fear over the outcome of some fight about to take place--a fight with
revolvers or daggers. More seldom he had seen clients of his exhibit
terror under just such circumstances as now confronted him--fear of
vengeance from some cause.

"But I never," declared Nat, telling of the matter later to his two
assistants, Berry Todd and Baldy Stoler, "saw a man in such a state of
fear as Lemberg was."

Realizing, as he sat there facing the German sleuth, who, as a last
resort, had applied to a rival for aid, Nat Ridley realized that he
must say or do something to reassure Lemberg.

"If I don't, he may have a nervous breakdown in my office and make an
unpleasant sensation," decided the great detective.

Accordingly, Nat strode over to where Lemberg was sitting in a chair,
and fairly trembling now. He placed a firm hand on the German's
powerful shoulder--Lemberg would have made two Nat Ridley figures, with
something left over--and exclaimed sternly:

"Look here, now! Don't make a fool of yourself, Lemberg! You are in no
immediate danger. You are safe in my office. Pull yourself together.
No one can harm you here, and if I am to help you I must have more
particulars. You are in no danger here."

"I--I am not so sure of that," whispered the German, looking nervously
around and out of the windows. "This Tola gang is terrible!"

"They may be. I know, from reading their history, that they were a
blood-thirsty offshoot of the Aztecs," admitted Nat. "But they can't
get you here!"

"Dan Steele thought they couldn't get him," said Lemberg in a low
voice. "But they did! And after my brother's murder and my uncle had
received mysterious warnings to leave the country, he boasted that they
couldn't get him. But they did! And now I think they will get me."

"But why?" asked Nat. "You aren't down there in Mexico. You're in the
heart of New York."

"And some of the Tolas may be in this very building!" declared the
German sleuth.

"What object would they have in killing you, granted that they have
some of their agents in New York?" Nat wanted to know.

"As the heir of my uncle and brother, I inherit most of those oil
wells," was the answer. "Their enmity will run against me now, unless I
relinquish my claim. I am going to do that, only I fear it will be too
late. Vengeance may already be sworn against me."

"Nonsense!" Nat said, with a short laugh. He was trying to make his
visitor forget some of his fear. "The wells are legally yours. Why
should you give them up? Especially when it well may be that these
fellows are scoundrels--that they are just playing on your fears to
get you to give in. The wells were bought and paid for, and you are
entitled to them."

Lemberg shook his ponderous head, and remarked:

"It seems that the Tola society, or the present-day members of it, want
money from the wells to re-establish their ancient splendor and power.
They want to make the Tola what it was in the days of the Spanish
Conquistadores. My uncle and brother did not know, when they bought the
wells, that the land, centuries ago, was owned by the Tolas. Now they
want it back again."

"How did you learn this?" asked Nat.

"From the reports Steele sent in before he was killed."

"Where are those reports now?"

"In my office."

"I should like to look at them," said Nat with interest--"that is, if I
am to help you in this matter."

"Oh, but you will help me, won't you, Ridley?" gasped Lemberg, seizing
the detective's hand. "I need help, and I don't know where to turn but
to you! See if you can't run these criminals down--find out where they
are hiding. Tell them I'll give back the wells if they will only let me
sleep in peace at night. I'm a wreck!"

Indeed the man looked it. There were big, puffy bags under his eyes,
and his hands trembled.

"But why did they kill Dan Steele?" asked Nat. "He had no interest in
the mines, did he?"

"No. I sent him to Mexico to run down the gang, and he was hot on their
trail when the double dagger got him. Poor Dan!"

"Poor Dan is right!" echoed Nat. "I knew him well. He was a friend of
mine, and for his sake--to avenge him--I'm going to take this case,
Lemberg."

"Thank you for that, Ridley!" exclaimed the other fervently. "It will
take a load off my mind. But be careful of yourself. Once it is known
you are seeking the Tola gang--those who carry the symbol of the double
dagger--your life may pay the forfeit."

"I've been threatened before," replied Nat grimly.

"But never in this way!" and Lemberg's voice was very serious. "Once
they find out you are working against them to help me--to avenge the
murders of my brother and uncle--they will----"

"They will not find out I am working on the case," interrupted Nat
Ridley. "I've dealt with fellows like this before."

"You don't know them!" warned Lemberg. "I took a roundabout way in
riding to your office, but I fear I was followed. I doubled on my
tracks and made a twisting trail, but I still fear I was followed."

"Well, we'll see that they don't see you leaving here," Nat promised.
"I have means of getting from this room to the floor above and down a
rear freight elevator that will fool the cleverest stalker. Don't worry
about that, nor about me. Now let's get down to brass tacks. Tell me
everything you can."

For an hour or more Carl Lemberg related all the details of the triple
crime, and Nat made shorthand notes, to the no small admiration of his
fellow sleuth, who declared it was a valuable adjunct to Nat's talents.
At the end of the talk Nat said:

"I must go over Steele's reports. There may be something in them that
you have forgotten."

"Very likely there is," admitted Lemberg. "I'm in such a state that at
times I hardly know what I am doing. If you will come to my office you
shall see all the papers."

Nat made an appointment for that afternoon, and then escorted the
German out of the office by a special stairway leading to the floor
above, so he could get out by a freight entrance.

"Don't worry," advised Nat as he shook hands with Lemberg. "They won't
spot you leaving here. And I think it is mostly your imagination that
is causing your fears."

"It is no imagination!" declared Lemberg, fervently.

However, he seemed to have gotten safely away from Nat's Times Square
office, for the sleuth sent Baldy down to Broadway to make sure nothing
happened, and the old detective reported that Lemberg had "scurried
into a taxicab like a rabbit in the hunting season."

"What's it all about, Chief?" asked Baldy, with the freedom of an old
retainer.

"You and Berry might as well hear the outlines of the case, and Mary
Dotley, also," remarked the sleuth, naming his clever woman detective.
"If I am going to take it, and I have promised Lemberg that I will, you
may be called on to lend a hand now and then. Come in and I'll go over
it with you."

The story of the Tola murders was told briefly, and Nat showed the
card, bearing the device of the double dagger, and also the little
weapon that was used as a pin.

"I want you to take this pin to Professor Watson, of Columbia
University, and have him analyze it for possible poison," said Nat to
Berry at the end of the conference. "And be careful you don't scratch
yourself with the point."

"I'm wise," declared Berry. "But suppose you do find it poisoned?"

"It may give me a line on the scoundrels who are using it and who have
killed three men," said Nat. "Those ancient Aztecs were devils in more
ways than one, and maybe the Tolas have inherited some of their cunning
and kept alive some of their knowledge."

While Berry went to the university laboratory, Nat, after going over
some matters in his office and starting his other assistants on the new
cases that had come in, went to Lemberg's suite of rooms in a building
on lower Broadway.

Though the sleuth rather discounted the fears of the German, yet Nat
was taking no chances. So he adopted a suitable disguise, in the art of
which he was a master, and was also very careful how he approached the
building where the German detective had his offices.

Nat looked carefully about as he approached the entrance, and his keen
eyes searched every face. Not until he was satisfied that he was not
being shadowed, did he enter.

He found Lemberg nervously pacing the floor and waiting for him.

"Ah, you are come! It is good!" exclaimed the German. "Now you shall
read what devils they are!"

He spread out on a desk the various reports Dan Steele had sent in from
Rolamotaza, the town nearest the Mexican oil wells. The first reports
contained little but routine matters, but as Dan remained longer in
the place he began to uncover some queer information about some queer
characters.

"It begins to look a little more promising," commented Nat, glancing up
from the reports.

"Yes," agreed Lemberg. "But read on."

Nat read, coming to the bottom paper in the pile, where Dan wrote that
he was going out to a certain place where, he had reason to believe,
the Tola gang held secret meetings. Nat read to the end of this report
and looked up.

"Where are the others?" he asked.

"What others?"

"The other papers--the rest of the report."

"There are no more," Lemberg sadly answered. "Dan Steele never came
back after writing that. He went to his death!"

Even the stoical Nat Ridley was startled at hearing this. But he shook
off for the time what sentiment gripped him and bent to the business
in hand. He made copious notes of all Steele had reported on, and then
definitely announced to Lemberg that he would at once begin work on the
case.

"And may you track down the murderers!" exclaimed the German. "I shall
sleep a little sounder to-night from knowing that you have this case,
Nat Ridley."

"Yes, Lemberg, I'll do my best. And I hope you do sleep soundly. I will
see you to-morrow and make further arrangements."

Nat bid the other detective good-day and hurried back to his own
office, using the same precautions as before. It was early afternoon,
and he had several matters to clear off his desk before going into the
Mexican puzzle. For three hours Nat was kept busy.

It was about five o'clock, and nearly time for Nat's office to close,
when Tommy Ray, or more popularly "Toodles," the office boy, came
rushing into the office, having gone to the street to get a paper for
Miss Dotley. Tommy's face showed great excitement, so much so that Nat
Ridley, coming out of his office for a moment, noted it and asked:

"What's up, Toodles--did the Giants lose?"

"Look!" gasped the lad, holding out a paper across the front page of
which, in big letters were the words:

                          MURDERED IN A TAXI

"Well, there's nothing new in that," commented Nat as he held out his
hand to glance at the sheet a moment.

"Wait until you see who it is!" Tommy exclaimed. He pointed to a name
in the first paragraph of the story.

"Carl Lemberg!" gasped Nat, shaken out of his calm. "Why, I was in his
office only a few hours ago!"

Nat read hurriedly how the well-known detective had been stabbed
through the heart while riding home from his office in a taxicab.

"I've got to get busy on this right away!" cried Nat, as he tossed the
paper back to Tommy. "Lemberg killed, just as he feared he would be!
The Tolas got him!"




                              CHAPTER IV

                           AN ORDER TO RAMON


From the hasty perusal of the flash story in the paper, Nat Ridley
gained an idea of how Lemberg had met his death--that is, he knew all
the police had found out in the short time between the discovery of the
body in the cab and the issuing of the evening extra.

"Look after matters here until I get back, Berry," called Nat to his
assistant. "I'm going to have a look in that taxi."

"Right!" Berry assented. "If you need any help 'phone in."

"I will. And, Berry--" Nat spoke in a lower tone, though there was no
one else in his office, "just keep your eyes open."

"For anything special, Chief?"

"For a sight of any men who look as if they might be Mexicans or
Spaniards," was Nat's reply. "I'm off!" and he hurried to catch one of
the descending elevators in the corridor.

The story of the murder of Lemberg, as set out briefly in the paper,
was to the effect that the chauffeur of the cab drove his fare to the
address given him, which was a German club where the detective made
it a habit to dine several times a week. The driver, finding that his
passenger did not alight on arrival, looked around to see what caused
the delay.

"I saw the gentleman sort of slumped over like, in his seat," the
taxi man told the police. "I thought maybe he had been hitting up the
bootleg. But when I shook him, I saw he was covered with blood. There
was a lot of it on his vest and there was a hole, right over his heart.
I called a cop from the next corner and he got the ambulance. That's
all I know."

The story went on to say that Lemberg was dead when taken to Bellevue
Hospital, and the surgeon who examined the detective said he had died
instantly from a stab wound in the heart.

There was no weapon found in the cab, and the first theory of suicide
was passed over when the surgeon said no man could have given himself
such a deadly wound.

"The question is," said Nat to himself as he made his way to the
nearest police station where, so the paper said, the taxi and driver
had been taken for examination after the body was removed, "when was
Lemberg stabbed? Obviously, some time between getting into the cab near
his office and where it drew up at the curb in front of his club. I
must have a talk with Carter, the taxi man."

Nat had no difficulty getting all the information he wanted from the
New York police. Though a private detective, Nat had more than once
given the regular force valuable clews on cases other than his own.

"Whatever in reason Nat Ridley wants, let him have," had been the
standing orders of Inspector Rossberg of the metropolitan force.

"Hello, Kelly!" called Nat on entering the station house and nodding to
the lieutenant behind the desk. Then, not to make it appear that he had
come around especially to find out more about the strange murder, Nat
went on: "You haven't seen Baldy around this afternoon, have you?"

"No, Mr. Ridley, I haven't," was the answer. "Is he in this
neighborhood?"

"He might be," was Nat's noncommittal answer.

Baldy Stoler was well known to Lieutenant Kelly and to others of the
regular New York police, since he had been on the force before leaving
to join Nat's agency.

"Working on a case, I suppose?" went on Kelly.

"That's it. I thought maybe he might have dropped in here as this would
be on his way. But I guess it's too late now. Anything new?"

It was a stereotyped question, such as Nat often asked, but this time
he knew what the answer would be.

"Well, yes," Kelly replied slowly. "We have a bit of a case here--it
might be in your line, too."

"A case?" questioned Nat, as though he had no idea in the world what
was coming next. "What sort?"

"Murder."

"Oh, they're common enough," and the sleuth spoke with an air of
indifference. "I hardly think it will interest me, unless it is out of
the ordinary."

"That's just it!" declared Kelly, with a chuckle. "It's very
extraordinary, or I wouldn't have mentioned it to you. And it concerns
a friend of yours--or rather, a rival."

"What's the joke?" asked Nat, as he lighted one of his strong, black
cigars and passed one like it to the appreciative officer.

"No joke at all, Mr. Ridley. There's been a mysterious murder done
in the last hour and the man killed is Carl Lemberg, the private
detective. You know him, don't you?"

"Sure! You don't mean to tell me he's dead!" and Nat was sufficiently
startled to throw Kelly off the track. Whereupon the lieutenant
proceeded to give details, adding that the taxi was even then in the
garage of the police station and the driver was in Captain Flood's room
being questioned.

"You don't tell me!" and Nat continued to be astonished. "Do they
suspect the driver?"

"Oh, no! He's out of it. Here he comes now," and, as Kelly spoke, the
precinct commander emerged from his private office, followed by a
typical New York taxi driver. The fellow looked anxious and worried,
but his face cleared as the captain, after nodding to Nat, said:

"It's all right, Kelly. This man can go. I know where to get him when I
want him. He hasn't the least bit of evidence. Report here once a day
until this affair is over, Carter," said the captain crisply.

"Yes, sir. And can I take my cab along?"

"Well, no, not just yet," was the answer. But as the man's face fell,
the captain said: "I'll arrange with the taxi company to let you have
another machine. We may need this for evidence."

"Oh, all right," and Carter's face cleared again. He left the station
house and Nat talked with the captain, mentioning what Kelly had told
him about Lemberg.

"A queer case," said the commander. "In broad daylight, on one of the
busiest streets in the world, a man is stabbed in a taxi and the
murderer gets away. Fierce, I call it! The papers will pound us again."

"You've got to expect that," answered Nat Ridley, with a grim smile.
"But how does this taxi man account for not hearing anything?"

"The only way he says it might have happened was when he was caught in
a traffic jam soon after picking up his fare. There was some blasting
being done, to put down a foundation for a new building, and the street
was blocked off a minute or two. The driver thinks that Lemberg was
stabbed just at the blast went off, which would have prevented his
cries being heard or any noise of the struggle coming out of the cab."

"The murderer picked a good time," commented Nat. "But how did he get
into the cab?"

"That's something Carter doesn't know. Lemberg may have been followed
up by someone who had a grudge against him. You know he has shown up
some pretty big bootleggers and dope peddlers. Well, one of them may
have been laying in wait and hopped into the cab just as, or soon
after, Lemberg got in. He could have chloroformed the German, or maybe
kept him quiet by a threat, and, when the blast came, he might have
driven the knife in. It is also possible that when the cab stopped, on
account of the traffic jam, that then the murderer opened the door and
did the trick, the blast covering Lemberg's call for help."

"That sounds more reasonable than the other," said Nat. "Well, it isn't
any of my affair."

"I'm going out to look in the cab," said the captain. "Some of my men
have given it the once over, but I always like to take a peep for
myself. Want to come?"

"I might, since I can't locate Baldy," stated Nat, as if it was of no
moment.

A little later he was standing in a quiet street at the rear of the
police station and garage. The taxicab had been driven out into the
open and was standing there.

"He bloodied it up a bit," commented the captain as he opened the
door. "They'll have to put new leather on before they can run this
out again," and he indicated several dark red stains. "But there
doesn't seem to be much else," he added as he looked carefully over
the interior of the vehicle. "Guess we'll have to get the finger-print
experts down here. Yes, Duffy, what is it?" he asked as a patrolman,
whom Nat knew slightly, came out and stood waiting for his superior.

"You're wanted on the 'phone, sir," Duffy reported. "It's Inspector
Rossberg about that bond robbery."

"Oh, I'll be right in. See you later, Ridley. This isn't your case,
but look around if you like."

"Thanks," rejoined Nat, and he peered into the cab. Almost at once a
fleck of something white between the back and the seat cushions caught
the detective's eyes. He looked around and noted that Duffy was engaged
in lighting a cigar, and then, with a quick motion, Nat put his hand
between the cushions and pulled out the white object.

He could hardly restrain an exclamation of surprise when he saw that it
was a card, and scrawled on it was the device of the double dagger!

"I might have known it would be here!" thought Nat. "The Mexicans were
on Lemberg's trail, and they got him. Bold devils they are! Knifing him
in a taxi in broad daylight in the heart of New York!"

He shot another glance at Duffy, but the patrolman, who was on reserve
duty, was taking advantage of the chance to get some fresh air and was
strolling about in the neighborhood of the taxi.

With a quick motion Nat Ridley slipped the card into his pocket and
was about to walk away when he noticed three men strolling along the
street and curiously observing the vehicle. The men had dark, swarthy
complexions, their hair was black, sleek, and shiny and their dark eyes
were shifty.

"Mexicans or Spaniards, if I'm any judge!" mused Nat. "And it wouldn't
surprise me in the least to learn that they came along to find out just
what the police are going to do in this murder case. I wish I knew more
about them. I will, soon. Meanwhile----"

Just then Duffy strolled over toward Nat and did exactly what the
detective wished should not happen. For the patrolman greeted the
sleuth loudly by name, and added:

"You working on this taxicab murder?"

"No, Duffy, I'm not!" said Nat decidedly. "I have other fish to fry.
I'm as busy as all get-out on another case. I have no time to look into
this. Besides, I think it's a case of suicide."

"No! Do you now?" asked the policeman. "Well, maybe 'twas. Thim Germans
are great for suicidin'. I wouldn't put it past this fellow, though I
didn't know him. So you're not on it?"

"No, Duffy. I just stopped in out of idle curiosity. It doesn't
interest me in the least."

"Well, I guess the regular police detectives will find out about it,"
went on Duffy with the ordinary policeman's faith in the wisdom of the
sleuths. "Comin' in?" he asked.

"No, I'm off," Nat answered.

The talk, on his part, had been purposely loud. He had noted with some
alarm the lingering walk of the three dark-skinned men. They seemed to
want to remain in the vicinity of the taxicab to hear what was being
said.

"If they can make anything out of what I said they're welcome,"
muttered Nat to himself as he prepared to walk along.

But he caught a glimpse of the face of one of the trio, and on
that face was a sneer. It was as though the dark fellow had been
laughing--as though he was not in the least deceived by the effort Nat
Ridley had made to throw off suspicion. If the strangers knew the name
Ridley, they could not have failed to have heard Duffy's loud use of it.

Then the sneering man spoke, giving a sharp order to his righthand
companion. Though he may have been speaking of someone else, Nat Ridley
had a strong suspicion that he himself was the one referred to when the
sneerer said:

"Ramon, you shall watch that pig! I do not trust him nor any of them!
Watch him!"

"He shall be watched, Señor," was the low-voiced reply as Ramon
received his orders. And Nat Ridley caught Ramon flash a look at him
that boded no good.




                               CHAPTER V

                         THE ROPE IN THE DARK


"Now just what?" mused Nat Ridley to himself, as the three
dark-featured men sauntered on their way. "What does that mean? No
good, I'm positive. But were they referring to me or to someone else?"

The detective, now that he had decided to enter this mysterious case,
determined to do his best, not only to avenge a fellow practitioner,
but for the sake of his own reputation. That is, his reputation as
regarded by himself. He cared little for what the public thought or
said, did Nat Ridley. But it was something to make a good, clean
clearing up of a case for the sake of himself and those in his office.
So it was a matter of pride with the sleuth not to be beaten in this
battle of murder and wits.

"If I challenge them," reasoned Nat, "and accuse them of speaking of
me as a pig, I shall lay myself open to the charge of butting in on
somebody else's business. That might queer matters at the start."

Therefore he decided against that, but as he watched the men walking
slowly away he mentally photographed their features in his memory
so that he would know them again. And not only did he make a lasting
vision of the men's faces, but of their walk, their actions, and such
of their peculiarities as appeared on the surface.

"For if they are what I think they are, they'll use disguises the next
time I see them," reasoned Nat. "They must have spotted me all right,
though how, I don't know."

On the other hand, Nat realized that he might be on the wrong track,
that these men might be idle, curious individuals who had heard about
the murder--as who had not by this time?

"And they could easily claim, if I talked with them, that they were
speaking of one of their own acquaintances when they used the endearing
term of pig," chuckled Nat. "Well, what's the next move, I wonder?"

And wondering this, the detective also wondered whether, by the talk he
had indulged in with Duffy, he had or had not thrown the dark-featured
men off the track.

"First of all," decided the sleuth, "I'll have a go at those fellows.
No use letting them get away with anything. I'll shadow them and see
where they hang out."

It was the work of but a few moments for him to slip into a sheltered
corner where he made some quick changes in his clothing and appearance,
so that when he emerged and took up the trail of the trio, Nat Ridley
resembled anything but the efficient officer who, a little while
before, had been peering into the murder taxi.

The three Mexicans--Nat decided they were of that nationality--strolled
along, talking in Spanish, as the sleuth made certain by catching a
few words that floated back to him. He knew something of the language,
though not much.

The trio appeared to be in no hurry, and evidently did not suspect that
they were being followed, for they did not use any of the ordinary
devices to confuse a trailer. Nor did they look back.

When they were a few blocks away from the police station and the cab in
which Carl Lemberg had been slain, the Mexicans hailed a passing taxi.

"They're in a hurry," decided Nat who was not far behind the three. He
quickly looked around for another taxi that he might use for himself,
but saw none that was empty and he had a vision of being left behind.
Then he noticed a small delivery wagon from one of New York's big
department stores. The driver was a young man and Nat signaled to him.

For a moment the young fellow seemed to think it was a case of being
held up in broad daylight, and he was about to step on the gas as he
neared Nat when the latter called:

"I'm a secret service man chasing some crooks. I need your help."

"Oh, that's different," and a relieved look came over the lad's face.
"I thought you were a stick-up man. But I haven't got anything, anyhow.
What's the dope?"

"Follow that taxi--that is, if you can spare the time," begged Nat,
showing his shield. "If not, drive along until I meet a cruising cab."

"I've got time," was the answer. "I'm through for the day."

And with such speed and skill did he follow the cab containing the
three Mexicans that he was not far behind them when their vehicle
halted in front of the Club Tamalle, a resort frequented by Spaniards.

"This is what I want to know," said Nat as he slipped the young fellow
a two-dollar bill. "Much obliged."

"Are they counterfeiters?" the lad asked, with a smile, as he pocketed
the money.

"Maybe that, and worse," answered Nat. "Just keep still about what
happened just now."

"That's what I will. I hope you get them."

"I will!" declared Nat.

He waited until the three entered the club, which was at its liveliest
later at night, and then got out of the delivery auto. Using that,
instead of another taxi, to chase his quarry had enabled Nat to fool
them completely, he thought.

He slipped over to the nearest subway and went back to his office with
the mysterious card he had taken from the crack between the back and
the seat cushions of the taxi in which Lemberg had breathed his last.

It was now early evening, but Berry Todd was on duty in the office,
having sent out to get some sandwiches while waiting for Nat's return
or for some word from the chief.

"Anything doing?" the younger sleuth greeted his employer.

"I think so," was the answer. "Get out the magnifying glasses, Berry,
and the finger-print records. This card may show something," and Nat
carefully laid the bit of pasteboard on a clean sheet of paper. "Any
report from Columbia about that little dagger?" he asked.

"It came in over the 'phone a few minutes ago," was the reply. "It
isn't a deadly poison on the points of the pin shaped like a dagger,
but it is some kind of dope that numbs a person."

"That accounts for it!" exclaimed Nat. "They must prick or scratch
their victim with that, and so render him helpless--so he can't
yell--then they knife him! We're coming on. Now for some finger-print
work."

Though the card bore several different finger or thumb prints, they
were those of persons not registered in the books of criminals on file
in Nat Ridley's office.

"Well, whoever handled this card hasn't yet been finger-printed around
here," decided Nat when the test was over. "I'll have to get in touch
with headquarters and some of the international books to-morrow. But
I've got another job on hand now."

"You don't mean to say you're going to keep on with this case now, do
you?" objected Berry. "You haven't had supper!"

"Well, I'm going to get a bite, and then I'm going to see Mrs.
Lemberg--the widow of the murdered man. She may be able to throw some
light on why he was killed. But you needn't stay, Berry. Lock up the
office."

A little later, having again changed his disguise to that of a
care-free man about town, Nat called on Carl Lemberg's widow. Mrs.
Lemberg lived in the Bronx, and Nat found with her Anna Lemberg, the
sister of the dead detective.

Both women showed traces of their grief when Nat was ushered into their
apartment, having sent up his card which brought a ready invitation to
come up.

"It is very good of you to come," said Mrs. Lemberg. "My husband often
spoke of you, and said, after poor Dan Steele was killed, that he was
going to engage you."

"He did engage me, and no later than to-day," stated Nat. "But he
should have been a bit sooner, it appears."

"Yes, they--they got him!" muttered the sister. "Tell me," and her blue
eyes sparkled dangerously, "do you know who the scoundrels were? Have
you any trace of them?"

"It is a little too soon for that," Nat answered gently. "But I am
going to do my best. I came to see if you could throw any light on this
mystery."

"We will tell you all we know," promised Mrs. Lemberg. "But,
unfortunately, it isn't much. My husband seldom brought his office
affairs home."

However, she and Miss Anna brought out some papers from the desk of
the dead detective, and Nat delved into them. Some of the things he
discovered seemed to give him satisfaction, for he smiled in a grim way
as he made some notes in his book. Then he questioned the two women
closely, and learned a bit more.

"Well," the detective said finally, as he prepared to leave, "I think
it looks a little more hopeful than it did at first."

"You mean you think you can find the murderers?" asked Anna.

"I hope so. At least, I can make a start and perhaps get on their
trail, though where it will lead, no one can say. I may have to go to
Mexico."

"Oh, I hope not!" exclaimed Mrs. Lemberg.

"Why not?" asked Nat, with a quick look at her.

"Because I fear it means death," she answered simply. "Look what
happened to my husband's brother and his uncle. If only they had not
gone there!"

"But they had business there," said Nat.

"Yes, I know. And then Mr. Steele went, and they killed him. My husband
talked of going--only talked, mind you--and see what happened to him!"

"It does seem a sinister place," admitted Nat. "But forewarned is
forearmed, you know. If I go to Mexico I will be on my guard. I may
call to see you again," were his parting words.

The widow, as she escorted him to the door, said again:

"Whatever happens, don't go to Mexico!"

Something appeared to have happened to the street lights, for when the
detective emerged from the Lemberg apartment the thoroughfare was in
considerable darkness, the only illumination coming from stores and
residences along the way.

But Nat thought little of this as he started off toward the nearest
subway, intending to go to his home on Central Park West, to spend the
night.

There was a dark alley midway in the block along which Nat Ridley was
walking, his thoughts busy with the strange happenings of the day. But
if he saw this dark side passage he gave it little thought until he
heard a peculiar hissing sound coming from it.

"A snake!" thought Nat instantly, for that is exactly what it sounded
like. He gave a momentary thought to the possibility that one of the
big pythons from the Bronx Zoölogical Park might have escaped and be
hiding in the dark alley.

The next instant he felt some thin, but powerful, coils circling about
his neck. For an instant the iron nerve of the sleuth almost failed,
and he put up his hands to ward off what he thought were the folds of a
serpent.

Then, in the dark, he felt the coils of a rope. An instant later the
noose was pulled tight, almost choking him, and he was hauled backward,
pulled off his feet, and dragged in the silent and gloomy alley.




                              CHAPTER VI

                        A CHANGE OF IDENTITIES


"Pronto!"

The word was hissed out in the darkness from somewhere behind Nat
Ridley as he was roughly pulled deeper into the alley.

Struggling as he was to keep the coils from choking him into
insensibility by their constriction, the detective kept his wits enough
to remember that this word was Spanish for "hurry" or "quick."

"The Tolas are after me, or someone they think I am," mused Nat grimly.
"They're fast workers--must have followed me to the Lemberg apartment
and been on the watch. Wonder if they put out the street lamps. No,
they couldn't have done that. Must have been just an accident that
favored them."

These thoughts rushed like lightning through the detective's brain as
he nerved himself for the struggle he knew must follow.

Come the fight did, an instant later. Nat succeeded in forcing up over
his head the coils of the lasso, and only just in time, for it was
tightening cruelly. But meanwhile, he had been hauled by the rope
deeper into the dark alley, so that now he was several yards from the
street whence help might come.

"We have him--the pig!" a voice grunted, as Nat felt strong arms about
him, and he recognized the tones as those of one of the three men who
had used the same expression that afternoon.

"The knife--pronto!" exclaimed another, and Nat knew they meant to kill
him as Lemberg had been killed--even as Steele and the others had been
murdered. Then a fierce, fighting rage took possession of Nat Ridley
and he gasped:

"Not yet, Tolas! Not yet!"

He could feel the men struggling with him start in surprise at his use
of that secret name, and one muttered:

"He knows us!"

"But the pig will not know us long!" hissed another. "Quick--the knife!
Let him have it between the ribs!"

It was so dark that Nat could not see more than two dim forms
struggling with him, but he thought he recognized the two as Ramon and
a companion, though who Ramon might be he could only guess.

Suddenly one of the men released his hold of the detective and drew
back a little. The inference was obvious. He was getting out his knife.

"Not yet, Tolas! Not yet!" gasped Nat again, and, raising his right
foot, he kicked out savagely at the dim form of the villain about to
stab him. It was a trick Nat had learned from a Frenchman. With the
heel of his shoe, the detective took the fellow amidships, or in the
"breadbasket," if you prefer.

With a grunt that was half a groan, the scoundrel went down in a heap,
though as he fell he hissed:

"Get him! He has disabled me! I have dropped my knife!"

There was ample evidence of this, for a tinkling sound followed Nat's
lucky kick and the sleuth knew the dagger had fallen on the stones with
which the alley was paved.

"The devil pig!" cried the other man, and Nat's eyes, now becoming
accustomed to the gloom, made out the second assassin rushing at him.
"This will be the end of him!"

But by this time the detective had his automatic out. He had no chance
to take accurate aim, but he did not need to, for he could fire from
the hip. And this he did--two shots in quick succession at the black
mass of the man rushing at him.

There was a cry of pain and the fellow quickly wheeled about, changing
his direction so that he was headed out of the alley.

"He is too much for us! Come--pronto!" he called to the other.

By this time the man Nat had kicked down was able to rise, though he
was doubled up in pain. Thus the two fled, leaving Nat victor on the
field and with spoils in the shape of a fine rope, made of braided
horsehair, as he discovered later.

"Touch and go!" muttered the detective grimly as he straightened up.
And then the street lamps suddenly shone again, though the alley
remained shrouded in gloom. As Nat looked toward the entrance he saw,
outlined against the background of light, a figure rushing toward him.

"Stand still!" the detective ordered. "I have you covered, and if you
come a step nearer----"

"I'm a police officer!" came the sharp answer. "If you shoot----"

"Oh, all right! I beg your pardon," said Nat quickly. Though he
determined not to be taken off his guard, and held his gun in readiness.

A moment later he saw a flashlight gleaming, the beams reflecting from
the brass buttons of a member of New York's crack uniformed force. Then
Nat knew he was safe and advanced, revealing his identity.

The policeman was a stranger to Nat Ridley, though the latter was
evidently known, by reputation at least, to the patrolman, for the
latter respectfully asked:

"Are you hurt, Mr. Ridley? Can I do anything to help?"

"No, they didn't get me," was the answer, "though it was a close call.
They lassoed me as I passed the alley and dragged me in. What was the
matter with the lights?"

"A fuse blew out at the power house, I guess. It's all right now. But
who were they?"

"Oh, a couple of hold-up men," said Nat, not wanting to go into
particulars.

"Well, I'd like to pinch them," said the officer. But when he and
Nat had looked around the alley no trace of the assassins was found.
The assassins had recovered and taken away the dagger. Only the rope
remained, and Nat took charge of that. He thought he might find a use
for it if he went on to Mexico.

By this time a crowd had gathered, attracted by the shots, as the
officer had been, but it soon dispersed when Nat remarked to several
who inquired:

"Oh, it was just a couple of bootleggers."

And so common has this form of industry become that it no longer
attracts attention in the larger cities.

"Sure you aren't hurt?" asked the officer when Nat came out of the
alley into the now brilliantly lighted street.

"Not at all. I kicked one man out and I think I hit the other with one
of my shots. But evidently neither was much disabled, for they ran out
just before you came up."

"I got here as fast as I could after I heard the shooting," apologized
the patrolman. "But I was away at the other end of the block, and----"

"That's all right," Nat said. "No harm done. I was looking for another
man and they happened to spot my pin, I suppose," and he motioned to
a diamond he was wearing in his tie. "They wouldn't have made much if
they got it, though," and Nat laughed, for the "diamond" was a paste
one, a part of his disguise.

Nat went on his way, but the patrolman, jealous for the good reputation
of his post, made a further search for the mysterious men, though he
found no trace of them.

Nat Ridley did not mention his real suspicions concerning the two.

"I'll keep them guessing!" decided the sleuth. "If they look in the
morning papers to see an account of this, they won't get much from the
news."

Though he thus made light of one phase of the affair, there was another
that worried Nat Ridley, and this was the closeness with which the
Tolas were hanging on his trail.

"They have evidently sworn vengeance against all who have anything to
do with the Lembergs or the oil wells," reasoned Nat. "I've got to
watch my step. They must have shadowed me from my office. Well, I'll
just stay away from there for a time--at least, I'll fool them."

He decided not to go to his apartment or to the office, and to carry
out a plan he hastily made he went to the Herald Square Hotel, where he
engaged a room. There, after a bath, a meal, and one of his big, black
cigars, he telephoned a cipher message to Berry Todd at the latter's
home.

"Come down here, Berry," requested Nat, "and bring number fourteen with
you."

This was the number of a certain valise containing several disguises,
and a little later the assistant detective arrived at the hotel with
it. Berry himself was disguised as a country lawyer in New York for a
holiday.

"Anything up, Chief?" he whispered to Nat when in the latter's room.

"Good and plenty!" was the answer. "I think I'm up against one of the
slickest and most desperate gangs I've ever dealt with. You've got to
help me, Berry."

"Surest thing you know, Chief. How?"

"You're going to be me."

"Going to be you?"

"Yes. I want you to make up to look like Nat Ridley, and, as me, leave
the office openly to-morrow. Do it as publicly as you can--I mean
speak to the elevator boys, the paper boys, greet anyone you see whom
you know and get them to call you by name--I mean my name. In short,
you and I are going to change identities."

"Suits me, Chief!" declared Berry.

"But you've got to be careful!" warned Nat.

"Careful of what--of making a break?"

"No. Careful not to get shot or stabbed or lassoed into a dark alley!"
and Nat's voice was quietly warning. "Berry, we're up against a
desperate game. It's asking you to take your life in your hands to
impersonate me for a while. Are you game to do it?"

Without a moment's hesitation Berry answered:

"I sure am, Chief! Here's where I double for Nat Ridley!"




                              CHAPTER VII

                              LIGHTS OUT


Berry Todd and Nat made careful plans for what might happen during the
next few days. It might be necessary for the assistant to continue the
rôle of chief sleuth for some time, or until the Tolas were thrown off
their guard.

"They were evidently out to do you," declared Berry, when Nat had told
of the episode in the dark alley.

"They were," agreed the chief. "Though how they made their plans so
quickly and got on my trail so easily I don't quite see."

"They're desperate!" decided Berry.

"Oh, yes. But worse, they have underground ways and means of getting
information," added Nat. "Evidently the whole band is sworn to
exterminate any who have a hand in keeping the oil wells away from
them."

"Is Mrs. Lemberg willing to let the property go back to the original
owners?" asked Berry.

"No, she isn't. She says part of it is hers by right now, since her
husband is dead, and she will need the income from it to support her,
since his business will not be carried on. She has the usual German
thoroughness and determination to hold on, and I don't know that I
blame her. But I'm working not so much to make secure the possession of
the oil wells as I am to avenge Dan Steele, and also Lemberg. Though I
was not friendly with the German detective, yet he belonged to the same
national society as I do and we are sworn to protect each other. So it
is war to the knife now between me and the Tolas."

"I'll help carry it on!" promised Berry.

A little later that night, having left certain disguises with Nat
Ridley, the helper went back home and the following morning he appeared
at the office in the semblance of Nat Ridley. So well did Berry
simulate the dress and bearing of his chief that for a moment even
Toodles was deceived, exclaiming as Berry entered:

"Good morning, Chief! You're a bit early."

"The early bird catches the worm, Toodles!" chuckled Berry. And there
was something in the laugh that made the office boy look a second time,
after which his eyes opened wide and he cried:

"Sweet daddy! If it isn't Berry!"

"Not so loud, young man!" warned the detective. "We don't want this
little masquerade known!"

Toodles subsided, but Berry was pleased that he had made such good work
of his disguise.

Nat passed a restful night in the Herald Square Hotel--that is, as
much of the night as was left after his adventures, and in the morning
went to his office, though not in his own character. He had made up to
resemble a small town business man in New York to buy goods for the
fall trade, which fact he spoke of as he ascended in the elevator.

Nat was so well made up that the elevator boys, who were well
acquainted with him in his usual manner of appearing, thought him a
stranger, and one of them directed Nat to the office of a commission
merchant in the suite adjoining the detective's offices.

To throw off any spies who might be watching, Nat entered this office,
but when the corridor was clear he came out, apologizing for having
made a mistake, and entered his own rooms, where he found Berry, as Nat
Ridley, waiting for him.

There was a hurried conference, and then the plan by which it was hoped
to trap the murderers, or at least to get on their trail, was put into
operation.

Berry, pretending to be Nat, left the office openly, and Toodles,
following instructions, asked loudly as Berry held open the door
leading into the corridor:

"What time will you be back, Mr. Ridley?"

"Can't say, Toodles!" was the equally loud answer. "If anybody asks for
Nat Ridley say he's gone fishing," and with a smile Berry, as Nat,
lighted one of the latter's black cigars, though the brand was a much
stronger one than Berry liked to indulge in. But he had to do this to
make the part perfect.

Watching his assistant from the partly opened door, Nat, who was still
attired as a business man, saw Berry enter the elevator, greeting the
boys who called him by name.

"Everything is working fine!" decided the detective.

As he watched he saw, coming from a washroom along the corridor, a
small, dark man who glided like a snake into the elevator behind
Berry. He had timed his entrance well, in order to be the last in the
descending cage.

"There goes number one!" thought Nat, as he made ready to take the next
down car. He had told Berry to wait in the corridor of the building
before going out, and when Nat reached the street floor he saw his
helper, who, of course, he pretended not to notice, start off down the
street.

Behind him went the man who had glided out of the washroom.

"The chase is on!" grimly reflected Nat Ridley.

Then began what was like a desperate game of hide and seek. All that
day Berry, as Nat Ridley, went about New York, into this office and
that, where he was known, but where his disguise was not penetrated.
And behind his assistant went Nat Ridley, now in one disguise and now
in another, for he deemed it wise to change several times.

And between Nat and Berry was the small, dark man who was a clever
shadower. That, the chief detective was forced to admit, for not once
did he betray himself, and to anyone less sharp than Nat Ridley and
Berry Todd, it would not have been known that any shadowing was going
on.

It was not until late in the evening that Number One, as Nat had called
him, was joined by another. This second man walked with a slight limp
and as if he were in pain.

"I wonder if that's the fellow I shot or the one I kicked?" mused Nat
as he noticed the halting gait. "It doesn't much matter, but it proves
that I'm on the right track. Now I hope Berry remembers what I told
him."

The assistant detective did, for he soon called a cab and, rather
ostentatiously, asked to be driven to the Club Tamalle where Nat had
seen the three men of the day before go in--the three, one of whom had
ordered Ramon to keep watch over some "pig."

Nat, meanwhile, had made some inquiries and had learned that the club
was the rendezvous of sportily inclined Mexicans, Spaniards and West
Indians.

"I wonder how Berry, as me, will fare in there?" mused Nat, as he took
another cab to follow his helper. "He'll be a bit conspicuous, I'm
afraid, but it has to be done. After all, it isn't a private club, and
anyone has a right there."

In the taxicab Nat Ridley made a final change in his costume, for he
knew he was following clever and dangerous criminals and he thought one
of them might have seen him some time during the day. Consequently,
when Nat alighted at the Club Tamalle and paused to pay for his ride,
he surprised a look of astonishment on the face of his driver.

"What game is this?" asked the man. "I didn't pick you up!"

"No," admitted Nat, with a smile, as he held up a couple of dollars
extra to signal to the man to keep quiet. "But you're letting me down
and you're getting paid for it."

"I'm wise," was the comment, and the cab rolled away while Nat, who was
looking like a man out for a good time, followed Berry into the club
where, it was rumored, high-priced and high-powered drinks could be
had. Before entering, Nat had observed the two foreigners, one of whom
walked with a limp, entering after Berry, who was still Nat Ridley, in
disguise at least.

It did not suit the chief detective's plans to be too conspicuous in
this well-known night club, so he tipped the head waiter to show him to
a table rather screened from view, yet from which Nat had a good place
from which to observe all that went on. There were a number of little
private booths down one side of the room, and Nat was near one of these.

Not far away Berry had a table. Following instructions, Berry had
picked up a woman, one of several who frequented the club for the
purpose of having drinks bought for them, on which they reaped a
percentage of the profits.

Berry began to act the part of a man out for an evening of pleasure.
He ordered champagne, or what passed for such, and at the order his
companion's eyes sparkled, for she saw her evening earnings greatly
swelled.

While Nat was watching and pretending to drink some wine he ordered
(and it was only pretending, for he was a teetotaler) the detective
heard voices in the booth next to him.

"And from there we went to Paloma," a man said in low tones.

"Was there anything doing there?"

"Not much. We left, pronto, and headed for Rola----"

The remainder of the name was lost in the blare of the jazz band which
struck up just then, but Nat thought he could guess what the rest of
the name was.

"Rolamotaza--the place of the oil wells," thought the sleuth to
himself. "We are coming on!"

The night club was now filling up rapidly, and Nat noticed that Berry
was entering fully into the spirit of the occasion, with his pretty
woman companion to aid him. Nat also noticed that the two men who had
been shadowing Berry had been joined by a third who, in spite of a
change in his clothes, was recognized as one of the trio who had passed
Nat when he was examining the cab in which Lemberg had been murdered.

Nat saw these three change their table so that now they were next to
the one where Berry sat, and the sleuth was wondering what that meant
when he saw Berry give him a secret sign.

Nat had instructed his helper that if during the evening need arose to
speak to his chief, a sign should be given, and Berry would go to the
washroom, whither Nat would follow. There they could communicate with
each other.

Accordingly, Nat rose slowly, as if without any definite object, and
made his way to the washroom, whither he saw Berry bending his steps.
The two entered, Nat behind Berry, and throwing a glance back over his
shoulder, Nat observed the three Mexicans following. They, too, were
headed for the private room.

"There's going to be something doing in about a minute, Berry," said
Nat in a low voice as the two entered the room, followed a moment later
by the three.

And something happened in less than a minute.

For the man who limped suddenly but purposely collided with Berry and
at once cried in angry tones:

"What do you mean--pushing me? Beast! Pig! You have lamed me! Not for
nothing shall a Gringo step on Don Castro!"

Like a flash the man drew a knife, but as he lunged for Berry his chief
leaped forward and, with a skillful blow, sent the steel clashing to
the floor.

At the same moment one of the other three shouted:

"Lights out!"

In an instant the place was plunged into darkness.




                             CHAPTER VIII

                              HALF A COAT


Silence followed the dramatic plunging of the rooms of the Club Tamalle
into darkness, but the silence did not last long. And as soon as Nat
Ridley had knocked aside the knife intended for his helper, the great
detective got ready for action.

"They're after me!" grimly decided Nat. "Or at least after Berry, whom
they have taken for me. There's likely to be a row!"

It came fully as soon as Nat expected, for he felt a rush of bodies
about him, muttered imprecations in Spanish, and then he heard Berry's
voice at his ear, whispering:

"Are you all right?"

"So far," Nat answered. "But I don't know how long I'll remain so. Did
anything happen?" he went on as the two made their way in the darkness
out of the washroom into the main apartment of the Club.

"Not yet. But I'm on the track of some of these fellows, and I think
they got wise to me--thinking I was you."

"So far our plan works," murmured Nat. "But I'm wondering if they have
spotted me as well."

There was no way of telling this at present. In fact, there was no way
of determining anything in the darkness and excitement, for excitement
there was in plenty.

"What is it?" some cried in English but with a Spanish accent. It was
a woman's voice. There were a number of them in the club, some very
handsome in a dark, Spanish way.

"It is the police!" came an answering feminine voice.

"Oh! Oh! A prohibition raid!" exclaimed several. "How silly!"

"Be careful!" warned the deep voice of a man, and Nat, hearing it,
tried to recall whether it was that of Ramon or any of his associates.
"It is no dry raid! There are spies and traitors among us! Be careful,
my friends!"

"He's one of the fellows we want!" whispered Nat to his helper. "See if
you can work yourself around to that side of the room. But be careful.
You have your gun, of course?"

"Yes," answered Berry in low tones. "But I fancy these fellows would
rather fight with a knife than a gun. I've got a knife, too."

"Watch yourself," warned Nat. "But get that fellow if you can."

"I will!" promised Berry, and he slid away.

Nat had backed to a wall, for he felt it safer in case of a fight which
he thought would follow to have all his enemies in front of him.

The detective dimly saw forms swirling this way and that in front of
him. Then, suddenly, he felt a pricking sensation on his left hand and
he drew it quickly away with the thought that someone was trying to
disable him by a scratch from the doped point of the miniature double
dagger.

At the same moment Nat reached out with his hand and caught hold of a
figure passing in front of him. He was surprised when a woman's voice
screamed and she exclaimed:

"Oh, let me go! I have done nothing!"

"You tried to stab me!" hissed Nat in her ear. He realized that these
Mexican murderers might have hired a woman to do some of their work.

"I stab you, señor? Never! I am but trying to get away. Are you Jules?"
she whispered leaning so close to Nat that he could smell the perfume
in her hair. "Oh, Jules, take me----"

"I am not Jules!" declared Nat. "But I felt a prick on my hand, and----"

"Pardon, señor, it was but a pin in my dress! Oh, why did I ever come
here! Are you of the police?"

"No," answered Nat, which was the truth. "You have nothing to fear.
There is a door--go!"

At that instant someone had opened a door leading into a corridor
at the end of which a light burned dimly, and the illumination was
sufficient to enable the detective to see a little.

Nat gave the unknown woman a shove toward the way of escape, since
he decided she had had nothing to do with the case on which he was
working. And the detective felt a distinct sense of relief when he
heard the news about the pin. Imagination can play uncanny tricks at
times.

Now several others, seeing the corridor door open, made a rush for the
exit, so that it became jammed and there were grunts and imprecations
from the men seeking to escape and screams and imploring calls from the
women and girls.

Most of the habitués of the club, Nat realized, had nothing in common
with the men he was seeking as the murderers of the Lembergs and Dan
Steele. But the detective felt that some of the criminals, or at least
their confederates, were present, and feared capture. Otherwise, the
order of lights out never would have been given.

As Nat was wondering what was happening to Berry, the detective felt
a man bump into him on the right side, and, at the same moment, one
came at him from the left. The distant light in the corridor had gone
out, and the place was once more in darkness, with a milling, pushing,
jostling and excited crowd doing all it could to get away from the
danger of arrest.

"Who are you?" asked Nat of the man on his left. "I am a stranger in
New York. I came in here by chance and----"

He heard a whisper of Spanish words and though he did not sense all the
meaning he had a feeling that the man on his left had called an order
to the one on his right.

"They mean to do for me!" thought Nat to himself.

As quickly as a shadow moves, he dropped to the floor. It was not
a moment too soon, for in the glow of an electric flashlight which
someone switched on, Nat caught the gleam of a knife blade, and it was
in the hand of the man who had been on his right.

The hand holding the knife lunged out, but the blade, instead of being
sheathed in Nat Ridley's body, found a place in the companion of the
Mexican. There was a cry of pain and a voice asked:

"Did I get the pig?"

"No, devil, you got me!" snarled another voice. "He has escaped us. I
bleed! Get a doctor!"

"I'm glad he's bleeding instead of me!" mused Nat as he crawled on his
hands and knees out of the danger zone. "That was a close one!"

If possible the excitement now became greater, for several had heard
what the stabbed man, injured by his own friend, had said, and there
was fear of more mistakes.

"Turn on the lights! Let us have light!" several implored.

"No! No!" came the answering replies. "There are traitors among us!
They must be killed!"

"I wonder what's happening to Berry all this while," mused Nat. "I hope
they haven't stuck a knife into him, thinking it's me. This case is
developing faster than I thought it would."

He was reassured a moment later when, crawling into a corner, at that
moment somewhat deserted, he felt another man crawling even as he was
doing and a voice called into his ear:

"It's all right, Chief. I got some dope."

"You don't mean dope from the double dagger, do you?" asked Nat, for he
recognized Berry's voice, though he could not see his face.

"No, I mean information. I got next to the fellow they call Ramon, and
I heard him say the next meeting would be in Rolamotaza, a week from
to-night. He mentioned a fellow named Don Castro."

"That's the chap who whipped out the knife in the washroom," remarked
Nat. "So the scene is going to shift, is it? Well, I'll be on the
job. I think we'd better be leaving here, Berry. We can't do much in
the dark, and as soon as the lights go up the ones we want will have
vanished. There's too much risk getting a knife in the back in the dark
to stay here."

"Just what I was thinking, Chief. It's too bad they spotted us so
quickly."

"Yes. They're slicker than most. Do you happen to know where the exit
is, or any way of getting out?"

"I've got it spotted," was Berry's whispered answer. "Follow me, but
keep low. There are too many of these birds lunging about in the gloom
with their toad-stickers."

"So I found out. But someone else got the steel intended for me. It's
best to be cautious," agreed Nat.

The two detectives started crawling on their hands and knees toward a
place Berry thought would take them out of the dangerous place. And as
Berry, followed by Nat, made his made way across the room, working in
and out of a tangle of legs, the heavy body of a man suddenly leaped
upon Nat Ridley's back. It was as if the detective had been tackled in
a football game after dropping on the pigskin.

He grunted from the impact of the blow, but at once squirmed to get
out from beneath the body. At the same time he began to reach out in
the dark to grab any possible hand that might be holding a knife. Nat
quickly succeeded in getting hold of a man's wrist.

"Give up!" commanded the sleuth. "I have you!"

With a quick twist and turn of a wrestling trick, he managed to get to
his feet, pulling his assailant up with him. Nat reached out to grab
the fellow's other hand, but the Mexican gave a squirm like an eel.
There was a ripping, tearing sound, and Nat felt all resistance cease.

"What the deuce happened?" he asked himself.

Nat felt he had a garment in his hand--a coat he judged it to be, but
whose or what it contained he could not tell.

"Six and a half! Six and a half!" Nat softly called.

This was a code number, indicating Berry's name. If the other detective
was near he would answer.

"Seven!" was the reply in a whisper into Nat's left ear.

"What's wrong, seven?" asked Berry.

"All right now," Nat answered. "They had me down, but I got a coat off
of someone."

"A coat?" questioned Berry.

At that instant the lights went up again, and Nat looked at what was in
his hand.

"No, half a coat," he corrected, with a grim chuckle, for the garment
was neatly ripped down the middle seam. "I got only half his coat,
Berry."

"You're lucky to have that much," answered the other sleuth. "But look
out. Here comes one of them with a knife!"

He and Nat looked up and across the room, from which a number of men
and women with much disheveled clothing were now fleeing, since they
could see the exits. And headed toward Nat and Berry was one of the
three Mexicans who had started the trouble in the washroom. The fellow
carried a wicked looking knife.

"This way!" Berry called to Nat, pulling him through a door and closing
it after them. "This way out. And keep the coat."

"Half a coat is better than none!" chuckled Nat, as a heavy body
crashed against the door, the key of which Berry quickly turned.

"Come on!" he called to his chief. "They're still after us!" And the
two ran through a deserted room and out into a yard back of the Club
Tamalle.




                              CHAPTER IX

                          THE WINDOW CLEANER


Most of the excitement in the Spanish club seemed to center around the
front entrance, probably because, when the lights were dimmed, patrons
who had nothing to do with the affair which brought Nat Ridley there,
ran out that way.

A crowd gathered from the street, attracted by the shouts of the men
and the screams of the women, and several police officers were on
hand. Nat and Berry sensed this as they emerged from a rear door into
the small yard, the chief detective still carrying the half of the
coat which he hastily stuffed beneath his own garment, so it would not
attract attention, for Nat was rather sprucily attired and to see a
gentleman of his calibre carrying a torn coat did not argue well.

"Is there a way out of here?" asked Nat of Berry as, under the gleam of
the moon, they looked about the yard which was not only surrounded by a
high fence, but had buildings on both sides and at the rear.

"Surely there is!" declared Berry, who looked enough like Nat in that
sleuth's regulation guise to be the latter's twin brother. "Like
yourself, Chief, I never go into a place that I don't make sure there
is a way out, and I spotted this one soon after I parked here this
evening. Come along before that fellow takes the door off its hinges."

Indeed, it seemed that this might happen, for the man with the knife on
the other side of the door was banging and kicking at it with enough
energy to indicate that some of the panels would soon give way.

"He wants us bad!" chuckled Nat.

"They're all bad actors," agreed Berry. "My, but things happened quick
after that fellow bumped into me! Only for you, Chief, I'd have a knife
in my ribs now."

"Oh, I guess you could have taken care of him, Berry."

"Well, I'm just as glad you did it, Chief. Now here we go."

Berry ran to a certain part of the fence where, to the casual observer,
there was no sign of a gate. But one was there, just the same, cleverly
concealed, and a moment later it was open and the two sleuths saw
before them an alleyway leading to the street.

Not much too soon, if they wished to avoid a fight, had Berry found the
exit. For as he and Nat slipped through the secret gate, the door Berry
had locked was burst open and the raging Mexican came rushing out,
crying something in Spanish and brandishing his knife.

"Silencio!" someone uttered in sharp tones and there followed some
commands in Spanish, hearing which the fellow who was eager to sheath
his knife in Nat's ribs reluctantly turned back.

"Guess his boss got after him," chuckled Berry. "They don't want too
much of a row here."

"There's been plenty of that," agreed Nat. "Well, I guess we can't
get any more information here in these rigs, Berry. They're on to us.
But you keep on being Nat Ridley and I'll change into something else
to-morrow. I want to get a chance to look at this coat."

"Half a coat you mean," corrected his helper. "It should be easy to
spot the man who lost it."

"Not likely he'd go about wearing part of a garment," objected Nat.
"He'd either borrow one, or else go around in his shirt sleeves. No,
let's beat it."

And beat it the two did, along a quiet back street and into a taxicab
which took them to their offices. Nat allowed his assistant, who still
impersonated him, to go in first, in case any of the Tola gang might be
watching. The great detective himself made use of the freight elevator
to reach his floor and, a little later, with the windows carefully
shaded, he was examining the half a coat he had torn off the man who
tried to kill him.

It was a cheap and ordinary garment, the kind of clothing sold in
department stores, and probably would, in itself, afford no clew to the
owner.

"But there may be something in the pockets," suggested Berry.

"Just what I'm going to find out," decided Nat.

From the outside pocket of the right side of the garment, which was the
part the sleuth had, were taken some strong cigarettes so much indulged
in by Mexicans and South Americans. There was also a clip of paper
matches. These Nat put aside for future examination, though they were
not very promising.

The inside pocket was richer in material to work on, for Nat brought
out two rather worn letters in their original envelopes. They bore
Mexican stamps and postmarks, showing they had been mailed in
Rolamotaza.

"See if you can make out the dates on those postmarks, Berry,"
suggested Nat, handing the envelopes over to his assistant. "You'll
find a magnifying glass in the second drawer of my desk on the right."

While Berry was at this task, Nat began a perusal of the letters
themselves. They were addressed to Juan Castro, and the detective felt
sure this was the man who wanted to knife Berry and also who had tried
to attack him.

Written in Spanish as they were, Nat could make out only a few words
here and there, for his knowledge of Spanish was small. He knew the
Spanish word for oil, and he saw that scattered throughout the missive.
He also saw the name Cora Ardell.

"That doesn't sound like a Spanish name," mused Nat, uttering it over
and over again. "I wonder where she comes in? Well, I'll have to get
these letters translated."

He glanced at the signatures. They were both the same, a scrawl which,
as nearly as the detective could make out, resolved itself into the
name Martolo.

"Another chap to look up!" mused the detective, through a haze of smoke
from one of his strong, black cigars. "Well, any luck, Berry?" he asked
his helper, who was puzzling over the envelopes.

"No, the postmark is so blurred I can't make any date on it. We might
try photographing it--that sometimes brings out things you can't see
with a glass."

"I don't know that it's important," Nat said. "I'll wait until I have
these letters translated. The date may not matter. We'll call it a
night, Berry, and quit. Now you go up to my apartment and get a good
sleep."

"Your apartment!" exclaimed Berry. "What's the matter with my own home?"

"You forget that you are Nat Ridley," said the detective, with a
chuckle. "Got to carry out the deception, Berry. Go ahead up. I've told
Julian to expect you." Nat referred to his colored servant who looked
after the Central Park West apartment.

"Oh, all right. I'll be living like a swell!" laughed Berry.

Nat, making some slight changes in his disguise, waited until his
helper had gone. Then, putting the two letters carefully in an inner
pocket, he left his office to go to the Herald Square Hotel again.

Forgetting none of the caution that was second nature with him, Nat
Ridley looked about before stepping into the street. It was about one
o'clock in the morning, but that, in New York, is only the "shank of
the evening," and the streets in the vicinity of Times Square were
filled with throngs.

Nat fancied he saw a man slink out of a doorway and start to follow him
as the detective started down the street, and, chuckling to himself,
Nat resolved to lead the shadow a merry chase. But the fellow, after
following Nat a short distance, appeared to be satisfied that his
quarry was not the man he wanted and turned back.

"He doesn't know me in this rig," Nat decided. "Well, adios, my friend.
Adios," and with this Spanish farewell Nat went to his hotel and to bed.

He was at his office early the next morning, and one of the first
things he did was to call for a Spanish interpreter whom he had come to
the office to look over the letters.

"Write me out copies of these," directed Nat, giving the man a desk,
pen and paper in a room off his own private office.

Several other matters claimed the detective's attention for the next
fifteen minutes. But he finally disposed of the affairs, sending Baldy
Stoler out on one case and Mary Dotley on another. Berry, as Nat, was
ostentatiously busy writing in the front office, to throw off the track
any of the Tola gang who might enter to spy out the situation.

As Nat was passing the desk of Toodles, the office boy, a shadow
darkened one of the windows--the shadow of a man on the outside ledge.

"Who's that?" exclaimed Nat quickly.

"One of the window cleaners," Toodles answered. "The janitor sent word
up early this morning that they'd be along our side of the building
to-day."

"Oh, the window cleaner," murmured Nat, and he saw that that was the
person whose shadow he had seen. The man, with his pail and chamois
skin, was fastening his safety belt into the rings on either side of
the casement.

Nat's stenographer spoke to him, asking him about a letter she was
writing for him, and when he had set her right the sleuth turned back
into his own private room, intending to ascertain how the translator
was progressing.

As he put his hand on the knob there came from the room a cry of
surprise, and, throwing open the door, Nat was in time to see the
window cleaner leap in, knock aside the Spanish interpreter, grab
something off the desk, and hurry out again.

"The letters! The letters!" cried the man Nat had hired. "The window
cleaner took those two letters!"




                               CHAPTER X

                             OFF TO TEXAS


Like a flash and without stopping to ask questions, Nat Ridley leaped
toward the window, through which, the Spanish translator indicated, the
window cleaner had entered and left.

The man with the chamois was not in sight, but his pail was still on
the broad, stone ledge, and Nat at once guessed what had happened.

"He walked along the coping here like a human fly and got into the next
office," decided Nat. "He was a spy, disguised as a window cleaner! I
thought he acted like an amateur when I first spotted him. The Tola
gang is after me hot and heavy!"

Nat Ridley needed but a second to make up his mind.

"Where he went I can go!" exclaimed the sleuth. "Look after things
sharp here for a minute or two," he called over his shoulder to Berry.

"Where are you going, Chief?"

"After that fellow!" exclaimed Nat.

"Be careful!" murmured the stenographer, who, with Toodles, had
run into Nat's private office at the alarm given by the startled
translator.

But Nat was already out on the ledge, which, aside from its height
above the pavement, was a safe place to walk. In a few seconds the
detective had entered the window adjoining his own--the window of
an importing firm with the heads of which the sleuth had a slight
acquaintance.

There was a clerk in the room into which Nat leaped from the window--a
clerk who seemed rather startled.

"Another one!" he exclaimed, and Nat knew he had guessed right.

"Did a man just come in here?" asked the detective quickly.

"Yes. The window cleaner."

"He was no window cleaner," Nat stated, with a grim look. "But let that
pass. Did he have anything in his hand?"

"Yes, some papers."

"Which way did he go?"

"Out through our office into the corridor. He said something about
feeling sick and needing medicine. I thought you were another one when
I saw you come in."

"You mean another window cleaner?" remarked Nat. "No, I'm not," and, as
he was in disguise, the clerk did not recognize him. Nat let it go at
that.

"Is anything wrong?" the young man asked, as Nat, after a look down
the corridor and noting it was vacant, decided it would be useless to
chase after the spy.

"No, not much wrong," was the reply. "I just wanted to ask him some
questions. Another time will do."

Nat was anxious to get back and ascertain how much of the letters the
translator had copied before they had been snatched away from him. So,
with a nod to the clerk, Nat went back the way he had come, along the
window ledge, somewhat to the surprise of the clerk.

The sleuth found his office force and the Spanish scholar awaiting his
return somewhat anxiously.

"Did he beat it?" asked Berry.

"He sure did! It was quite a plan--pretending to be a window cleaner
and even impersonating the janitor in telephoning up to tell Toodles
he was coming. He got both letters, I suppose?" Nat ruefully asked the
translator.

"Unfortunately of a truth, yes, señor," was the reply. "But not before
I had made copies of them both. Here they are," and he held out two
sheets of paper.

"Good!" cried Nat. "You copied them both, did you? Fine! As long as
we know what the letters say we don't need the originals, unless they
contain something incriminating."

"They do not seem to be of that nature," said the translator. "The
missives do but contain some directions about oil wells and something
of a contest over them. There are a number of names of persons and
places."

"Good!" cried Nat again. "That is what we want."

Eagerly, he began perusing the translations of the letters found in the
torn coat and, as he read, a pleased smile spread over the sleuth's
face.

"This settles it!" murmured Nat.

"Settles what?" Berry wanted to know.

"About going to Texas and possibly to Mexico. I'll have to leave in a
few days. I'm on the track of the double dagger gang now, all right!"

"Then you're going to run them down?" asked Berry.

"I am if it's humanly possible. I promised Mrs. Lemberg I would do what
I could to avenge her husband's death. But I also have a big bone to
pick with these devils in the matter of Dan Steele's death. Dan was
once a pal of mine. I'll make those imps sorry they knifed him!" and
Nat's eyes blazed.

Once more he read the translations, and then had his stenographer make
copies of them which he put in his pocket, leaving the pen translations
in his safe.

"That spy window cleaner wasn't as smart as he thought himself,"
chuckled Nat as he prepared to go out to arrange about transportation
to Paloma. "He wasn't quite quick enough getting those letters back.
You did your work quickly and well," he said to the Spaniard.

"I am glad that the señor is pleased," was the reply, and Nat added a
generous bonus to the fee the man charged.

"Well, what's the game now?" asked Berry when he and his chief were
alone in the private office after the excitement had calmed down. "Am I
to go on being you?"

"Until you get orders to the contrary," Nat answered. "And now
let me see--I've got to assume a new character. What would be a
natural disguise for one who is going to the Mexican border? I think
I'll go as a travelling hardware man, looking for orders for farm
machinery--tractors and the like. I'll brush up a bit on the talk of
the trade."

Nat Ridley had a wide acquaintance in New York, and among them was a
friend in the whole-sale hardware business. Putting on a new disguise
from his office stock--making up to look like an inconspicuous office
clerk, Nat left his headquarters and sought out Jabez Norman, the big
hardware man.

To the latter Nat explained enough of the matter to satisfy the natural
curiosity of his friend, and then, for a day or so, Nat absorbed a
lot of information about shovels, rakes, hoes, disk harrows, plows,
tractors, and the like, together with trade and discount terms. He also
managed to pick up a smattering of Spanish which was to stand him in
good stead.

Having gotten enough hardware knowledge, he thought, to serve him in a
pinch, Nat began to put his affairs in shape so that he could leave for
his Mexican trip. For he did not doubt but that he would have to cross
the border.

"These plotters and murderers probably slide back and forth over the
line several times a week," the sleuth decided. "I must do the same."

The publicity following the murder of Lemberg, the solution of which
baffled the police, and the stir made by the attack on Nat and Berry in
the Spanish club, seemed to have sent the Tolas to cover.

During the time, after he had had the letters translated, when Nat was
preparing to start for Paloma, there was no further attempt on the part
of Ramon and his gang to interfere with the detective.

The unfortunate Lemberg was buried and Nat made a last call on his
widow, promising to do what he could to bring the murderers to justice.
Mrs. Lemberg was not able to give any more clews than those which she
had already furnished the sleuth.

"My last word to you, though, Mr. Ridley," said Mrs. Lemberg as the
detective was about to take his leave, "is to be on your guard."

"I will," he replied.

"You little know the desperate character of those men," she went on.
"My husband did not realize it until too late, or he might be alive
now."

"They certainly are desperate and cunning," agreed Nat, as he reflected
on the fact that, in spite of all his precautions and disguises,
the Tolas had, in some manner, found out about his visit to the
Club Tamalle, learned that he had the letters, and had made such a
successful attempt to get them back. It was only by chance that the
translations had been made before the window cleaner played his trick.

"You shall hear from me," promised Nat as he bade Mrs. Lemberg a final
good-bye.

"I hope in person," she answered, with a wan smile. And there was
meaning and emphasis in what she said.

From her apartment Nat went to a railroad office where he bought a
ticket and berth for Paloma. He thought he was well disguised and that
he had come by such a roundabout route that none of the Mexican gang
would be able to trail him.

Yet when Nat emerged from the office he was sure a dark, swarthy man,
shabbily attired, who shuffled around the corner, was a spy watching
him.

"I'll give him a run for his money!" decided the sleuth, with a grim
look in his eyes.

Nat pretended to be in a great hurry and hastened along the street head
down, looking at some papers he took from his pocket. But out of the
corner of his eyes, he was watching the shabby man and saw him prepare
to do some shadowing. Then, when opposite the fellow, Nat turned
suddenly, as though to go back, having forgotten something. But he
deliberately collided with the spy, and with such force as to knock him
into the gutter where there was a puddle of water.

"Sorry!" exclaimed Nat. "You should look where you are going, my
friend!" he added sharply.

For a moment the fellow said nothing, though his face grew darkly red
with rage. Then he cried out a Spanish imprecation, shook his fist at
Nat while scrambling out of the puddle, and added:

"Son of a pig!"

"Ah, ah! Señor Ramon or one of his friends! I thought so!" chuckled
Nat, and before the fellow could arise to follow, Nat slipped into an
office building, went up in the elevator, down again and out through
another entrance, thus effectually throwing the shadower off the trail.

Yet with all his precautions and this strategic upsetting of one of his
enemies, Nat Ridley felt that they were still on his trail, and he was
more positive of it when he went to take the night train for Texas.

Some might ask why Nat did not arrest this rascal and force him to
confess. The answer is, the great detective knew that this could not be
done. The secret society was too powerful--no member would say a word,
not even when in the shadow of death. If a man thought to squeal, he
well knew that, once at liberty, his life would pay the penalty.

Tired out, Nat entered the sleeping car and was groping his way along
the green-curtained aisle when the porter accosted him, asking the
number of his berth.

"Twelve," answered Nat.

"Yais sah, dat's right! Lower twelve," and the colored bed-maker looked
at Nat's ticket.

"Lower twelve and upper twelve," said Nat, holding out a second coupon.

"Upper twelve?" gasped the darkey. "Am dere two ob you?"

"No, I'm traveling alone," replied Nat, with a smile. "But I always buy
two berths, an upper and a lower. I don't like anyone above me."

"Oh!" gasped the Porter. "Dat's too bad!"

"What's odd about that?" asked Nat. "It's a whim of mine."

"I wish I'd knowed dat, boss," the negro went on scratching his woolly
head. "I didn't spect anybody had upper twelve, an' I jes' done put a
gen'man in it."

"Oh, did you?" asked Nat sarcastically. "Well, then you can just rout
the gentleman out and leave that berth empty. I've paid for two and I'm
going to have them. No one sleeps above me!"

As he spoke the curtains of the upper berth parted and a dark face
looked out.

"Pardon, señor," said a man in soft Spanish accents. "But there is no
other place vacant in the train, and if you are not going to use this
berth I shall be glad to pay you for your lower one and also for this."

"Nothing doing!" snapped Nat briskly. "That's my berth, and I'm going
to have it."

An ugly look came over the face of the man in upper twelve.




                              CHAPTER XI

                            A FREE SPENDER


For perhaps ten seconds Nat Ridley stood in the aisle of the sleeper,
looking at the man who confronted him from the upper berth. It was past
midnight, and the passengers entering the train in the Pennsylvania
Station went directly to bed or sat in the smoking compartment until
ready to turn in, for the porter had all the sections made up.

Then the Mexican, Spaniard, or whatever he was, let his eyes fall
before the steady gaze of the detective and thrust one leg out over the
edge of the berth.

"I am sorry, señor," he began, but Nat was in no mood for polite
rejoinder and merely remarked:

"It's all right--not your fault so much as it is this porter's," and
he nodded toward the Negro. "But I always travel this way--can't sleep
with anyone above me, and I'm not going to begin now. I guess you can
find another berth."

"No, sah, boss--beggin' yo' pardon, we's full up!" exclaimed the
porter. He saw that he had made a mistake and, looking to the tips in
prospect--as well as to the bribe already pocketed--he tried to carry
water on both shoulders and propitiate both travelers. "I's mighty
sorry, boss," he went on to Nat, "dat I took one ob yo' two berths.
I didn't s'pose any one man would want two, 'less he were twins. I
figgered de clerk in de ticket office done make a mistake, an' so I
told dis gen'men he could hab de upper."

"I'm sorry; but he can't," said Nat, with finality.

"I'll fix him up in de smokin' room," said the porter. "Come on, boss,"
he continued. "I kin fix you a good bed."

By this time the stranger was in the aisle, having climbed down the
little ladder the porter brought for him. He had slipped a coat over
his pajamas. He had evidently counted on a full night's sleep when Nat
aroused him. The detective looked narrowly at the fellow, but his face
was not familiar and Nat did not remember to have seen him before,
either in the trio on the street near the cab containing the murdered
body of Lemberg or in the Club Tamalle.

"But if he isn't one of the Tola gang, he belongs to the same race, and
I don't trust them--not now," decided Nat. "I don't want them sleeping
above me."

While the Mexican, with more murmured apologies, went to the other
end of the sleeper, Nat piled his baggage into the upper berth and
then sat down on the edge of the lower bed to think the matter out.
Decidedly, he did not like what he had just discovered.

"I think they're on my trail, in spite of all my precautions," mused
the sleuth. "They must have spotted me in the ticket office, and they
easily found out where I was going and what berth I had. Then this
fellow probably bribed the porter to let him come in here. Well, I've
spiked their guns for a time."

But the more the detective thought it over the less he liked it, and he
finally reached a decision that caused him to chuckle silently as he
began to undress.

Before stretching out Nat rang for the porter and said:

"Don't worry, George, I won't hold it against you that you tried to get
away with one of my berths. Here's a dollar, and when you get to the
end of your run I may have another for you."

"Dat's de kind of talk I likes t' heah, boss!" and the porter grinned
from ear to ear.

"But don't disturb me during the night, and make sure no one else
does," warned Nat. "I've got a terrible temper when I'm awakened out of
a sound sleep. See that I'm not disturbed."

"Dat's what I'll do, boss. I suah will!"

Then Nat went to sleep, first having taken the precaution of slipping
his automatic under his pillow where it was ready to his hand. The
train rumbled out beneath New York City, beneath the Hudson River, out
over the Newark meadows and so toward the south and Texas. Nat Ridley
slept, while, curled up none too comfortably on the leather seat in the
smoking compartment was a dark-faced man whose scowl did not add to his
looks. From time to time when alone he muttered something beneath his
breath. But when the porter came in during the night, he always found
his guest smiling.

Morning came, and, with the dollar bill in mind, the porter did not
call Nat Ridley, whose temper was so short when suddenly aroused. Not
until every other passenger in the sleeper was up and dressed did the
porter venture carefully to open the green curtains of lower twelve to
say softly:

"It will soon be brekfust time, sah!"

There was no answer, and the window curtains were still down, shrouding
the berth in gloom.

"Does yo' still crave sleep?" asked the porter softly, as he reached
forth a hand to shake, as he thought, the slumbering form. But his
black fingers encountered nothing but bed clothing, and with an
exclamation of surprise the porter swung back the curtains, letting
in light enough to see that the berth was empty. The man who always
traveled double had disappeared, bag and baggage.

"Well, whut yo' know 'bout dat?" gasped the black fellow.

"What is the matter?" asked the Mexican, pressing forward eagerly. "Has
anything happened to the señor who was so selfish?" and from the cruel
and crafty smile on the face of the man who had slept in the smoking
compartment a close observer might have gathered that he would not
greatly have minded had the "selfish" man died in his sleep.

"He's done gone--dat's whut happened!" exclaimed the porter. "An' he
done owes me a dollar! De nex' time I lays myse'f out----"

But he checked himself suddenly and a grin replaced the scowl of his
face as he reached down on the pillow and picked off a crisp dollar
bill. Nat Ridley had not forgotten his promise.

"But where is the señor--what has become of him?" asked the Mexican.

"He mus' 'a' got off in de night," said the porter. "We made quite a
stop at de junction, an' he mus' 'a' got off den. But he had a ticket
clean through to Paloma," he added.

"Yes, I know he did!" exclaimed the Spaniard.

"Yo' knowed dat?" asked the porter suddenly.

"Well--er--I think I heard him say he was going there," was the
confused answer. "Why should he get off short of his destination?"

"I dunno, 'less he couldn't sleep," chuckled the Negro. And then, as he
kissed the dollar bill before putting it in his pocket, he added: "But
I should worry! I got mine!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a hot night in Paloma, Texas, and the temperature of the night
appeared to have imparted something of its nature to what was going on
in the Cordova Club, a resort much frequented by Americans as well as
by Mexicans filtering over the border line.

A jazz band was blaring out its most blaring music--a band composed, it
would seem, of negroes, though in its advertisements the Cordova Club
made much of its Spanish orchestra. There was a scurrying to and fro of
waiters bearing tall glasses of cooling drinks, and it might be argued,
other drinks, cooling in so far as ice was concerned, but which seemed
composed of liquors that set the blood tingling.

In other words, it was pretty freely whispered about in Paloma that
much stronger "stuff" than the legal half of one per cent. was freely
dispensed at the Cordova Club.

It was what might be called a high class resort--that is, evening dress
for the men and women predominated, though it was not absolutely
required that a man have on his "soup and fish," or that women must be
bared of arm and shoulder. But that was usual.

Among others who sauntered into the gay and blaring club this hot night
was a well-dressed man who seemed bubbling over with good nature. His
evening clothes were worn with an air as if he put them on each night
to saunter forth for hours of gay life, and he had that about him which
caused the head waiter to hurry forward deferentially to ask:

"How many, sir?"

"I'm alone," was the smiling answer. "And I'd appreciate it, captain,
if you could put me at a table with some gentlemen where I can enjoy
myself."

"Of a surety, señor," was the ready response. "I will place you among
what we call the Bohemians."

"Fine and dandy! That suits me right down to the ground!"

A little later the well-dressed stranger was ushered into a circle
of equally suitably attired men at a central table, near the dancing
floor. As the head waiter left this stranger remarked:

"I suppose there will be no objection if I order some bubble water for
the crowd?"

"Bubble water, señor?" questioned the waiter who had come up at a
signal from the captain.

"Champagne!" exclaimed the stranger. "Gentlemen, allow me to introduce
myself," he went on. "Bill Brice is my name. I'm traveling for the
National Hardware Corporation and I'm taking a night off. Will you
oblige me by imbibing a bit of bubble water with me?"

Would they? You should have seen their eyes sparkle at the mention of
the sparkling wine. And the waiter, at a signal from his chief, hurried
off to fill the order.

Champagne for the whole table! It was seldom done, but----

"He must be a free spender," one of the crowd remarked as they all gave
their names to "Bill Brice" in return for his own. "Well, they can't
come too free for me."

Then the jazz band blared on, the glasses tinkled, and the champagne
frothed while, in a quiet corner, a dark-faced man remarked softly:

"So, he got here after all, did he? But when did he leave lower twelve
and slip away from me? That is what I would like to know."




                              CHAPTER XII

                              EL CAPITAN


None of the parties in the Cordova Club was any more lively or gay
than the one at the table where Bill Brice, of the National Hardware
Corporation, sat buying champagne. There were songs in English and
Spanish, though it must be admitted the Spanish ones were the best
sung since, it developed, most of the men who were partaking of the
hospitality of Bill Brice were Mexicans, though many claimed to be pure
Castilians.

"This is the life for me!" boasted Mr. Brice, who still had in front of
him the same first glass of champagne he had ordered at the start of
the evening. He had taken a single sip, when his new friends insisted
on drinking his health, but thereafter the bubbles rose from the bottom
of his glass unnoticed.

One of the Mexicans, who had said he ran a moving picture theater in
Paloma, noticed this and remarked on it.

"I had plenty before I drifted in here," explained Mr. Brice, "and I
find it sets better on my stomach if I smoke a bit between drinks, my
friend."

With that he pulled out a strong, black cigar and began puffing on it,
blowing smoke rings to the no small admiration of his companions.

The evening wore on, the band played louder, more men and women entered
the club, and the waiters hurried here and there with their bootleg
products, for so near was the Mexican border that the customs officials
were hard put to prevent contraband being smuggled over the line.

"This is the life!" exclaimed Mr. Brice more than once. "I'm about
sick of the hardware line," he confided to his neighbor. "I wish there
was some other way of making money. You wouldn't like to be selling
tractors, plows, hoes and rakes all your life, would you?"

"Of a surety not, señor," was the reply.

"Maybe you make yours in some easier way?" suggested Mr. Brice. "Say
oil wells, now."

"Let us say oil wells," agreed the other, with a smile.

"No, but seriously," went on the free spender, "are you in oil?"

"I am, of a surety, señor."

"And do you know where I could invest some money?"

The eyes of the other gleamed as he answered:

"Naturally. If you are interested----"

But he broke off as a commotion at the entrance indicated something
unusual going on, and a moment later a party of several men and women,
headed by an individual who would attract attention anywhere, entered
the club. He was a big, handsome, swarthy man, and he wore a uniform
that became him well.

"Is he the commander-in-chief of the Mexican army?" asked the man who
had called himself Bill Brice.

"That is El Capitan," was the answer.

"Captain of what?"

"He was of the army," was the reply. "But he is retired. It was he
of whom I was about to speak when you mentioned investing in oil, my
friend. He has large holdings, señor. El Capitan would be the one for
you to know."

"Then I'm going to cultivate his acquaintance," was the laughing
comment. "And when Bill Brice goes cultivating, something grows," and
he chuckled with easy good nature. "Could I meet this captain?"

"He is called El Capitan, señor," said the other, making three, full
syllables of the name. "He is also Martolo."

"Martolo!" exclaimed Mr. Brice with such sudden energy that his
companion stared at him in surprise and asked:

"You know him already, then, señor?"

"Oh, no--no," and the hardware man laughed and blew another ring of
smoke. "But I have heard the name."

The distinguished former soldier and his party were deferentially
escorted to a table, and at once ordered champagne, so it would seem
that Mr. Brice had done the proper thing.

The evening wore on, the club becoming gayer and gayer, and the bottles
of "bubble water," accumulating at the table of Mr. Bill Brice--but
they were empty bottles. Meanwhile, he had talked further with Señor
Valdez, his nearest neighbor, about investing in oil wells, and had
received the promise of an introduction to El Capitan later in the
evening.

As a matter of fact, there was none of the evening left. It was long
past midnight, but still the jazz band played on and the glasses
tinkled while the dancing became more and more abandoned.

"It is a good time now, I think," said Señor Valdez to the hardware
man, "to have you meet El Capitan. He is in the mood."

"Suits me," was the answer. "I sure do want to get out of the game of
selling plows and tractors. It isn't my line."

Mr. Bill Brice spoke truly, his line was detective work, and the free
spender was none other than Nat Ridley. He had decided to take no
chances in the sleeper and had slipped out at the junction, laying
over until the next through train to Paloma, and, thereby, greatly
surprising not only the porter, but the man who had unlawfully been in
upper twelve.

Many of these who had been at the table of Mr. Brice, or Nat Ridley,
had by this time drifted away. The gay party was breaking up, but there
were still congenial spirits in the club, and the center of life was
now about the table of El Capitan.

Thither Señor Valdez and Nat Ridley, known to the Mexican as "Bill
Brice, a free spender," made their way, moving amid the dancers, the
coming and going of guests and the rushing of eager waiters.

El Capitan Martolo seemed very popular indeed. Someone was continually
leaning over his shoulder, whispering in his ear, or pledging his
health in a glass of champagne. Now and then men who glided in to speak
to him glided out again as quickly, bent on some mission, it would seem.

"El Capitan is a very busy man," commented Nat. "Very busy--with oil?"

"With oil--and other interests," admitted Señor Valdez, with a smile.
"If it pleases him to take you into his confidence you will be a lucky
man."

"I guess I'm pretty lucky, anyhow," returned Nat. "If I wasn't, I
wouldn't be here."

"You were in some danger, then, Señor Brice?"

"Yes, you might call it that. But I'm generally able to take care of
myself. I suppose there is trouble here now and then?" His voice was
questioning.

"Trouble? Of what sort, señor?"

"Well, you know the prohibition authorities----"

"Oh, they are a joke!" laughed Señor Valdez. "We never have any trouble
from them. But it is true that, now and then, someone drinks not wisely
but too well, and there is what you call a fracas."

"Oh--a fracas," repeated Nat. "You mean shooting and all that?"

"Yes. It is well that the señor is lucky. But to-night is a quiet one.
Nothing will happen."

Nat recalled that statement a little later and had to smile to himself
as he did so, in spite of the seriousness of his situation.

He and his new friend were almost at the table of El Capitan when
a man, who seemed greatly excited, brushed his way none too gently
through the press of persons and handed the former officer of the
Mexican army a letter. At once a wild desire to see that note took
possession of Nat Ridley, and he made up his mind he would get it.

El Capitan read the missive through quickly--it was not long--and he
was thrusting it into the side pocket of his coat, having directed the
messenger with a nod to stand aside a moment, when Nat was brought up
for introduction by his new friend.

"He would like to invest in oil wells," said Señor Valdez.

"Ah--oil wells? It takes much money," said El Capitan, with a smile, as
he shook hands with Nat and the latter noted the powerful build of the
Mexican.

"Well, I happen to be pretty well fixed," Nat, with an easy air,
replied. "And I'm tired of selling hardware. So, if you could put me
wise to something in the game----"

"Ah, yes, Señor Brice, it is a game!" declared the army man. "I have
been in it some time, but there is yet much for me to learn. But I
shall be glad to teach you."

"Thanks, El Capitan," responded Nat. "I can't learn any too soon if I
want to make anything. There are a lot of wells being put down now,
aren't they?"

"A few, Señor Brice, and I control some of them. Now, if you wish to
talk business," and the Mexican's eyes gleamed, "I shall be happy to
receive you at my office."

At that moment El Capitan struck a match to light one of his strong
cigarettes, and Nat at once pulled out another strong, black cigar,
bit off the end and leaned over, very close to the Mexican, to take
advantage of the occasion, murmuring:

"A little of your fire, if you please, El Capitan?"

"As much as you please, señor," was the gracious response, and
Nat's hand went in a stealthy fashion he had learned from an expert
pickpocket to the side pocket of the Mexican. When the detective leaned
up the letter the messenger had brought had been transferred from one
pocket to the other.

There was further talk of oil wells, and Nat made a date with the big
officer to talk more the following day, or rather, this same day, for
it was now long past midnight.

Excusing himself for a moment, the detective went to a washroom, where
he took out the letter he had purloined. He wanted to read it before
anything could happen.

As he expected, when he unfolded it under the lights in the small
anteroom, the missive proved to be in Spanish. But Nat had in the last
week or so given himself enough mastery of the language to make out
something of the contents of the note. He saw that it referred to the
Lemberg family and to further plans for making them give up their title
to the oil wells which were wanted to further the plans of the Tola
gang.

"I'm on the right track!" mused Nat as he thrust the letter back in his
pocket to return to El Capitan. As he left the washroom the detective
noticed the messenger who had brought in the note coming out after him,
but he thought little of it at the moment.

A little later Nat invited El Capitan to share a bottle of champagne
with him, though the detective did not intend to drink any of the wine
himself. It was while he was seated at the former officer's table that
the messenger who had delivered the note approached. He made a sign to
El Capitan and, at the same moment, spoke in Spanish. Nat looked up in
time to see the messenger pointing what seemed to be an accusing finger
at him.

El Capitan shot out a sharp question, and there was a quick interchange
of excited words. Then El Capitan turned to Nat and began:

"It seems, señor, that you have----"

"The fat's in the fire!" was the thought that rushed into Nat Ridley's
mind.

"Pardon," murmured a voice in Nat's ear. A hand touched his shoulder,
and a man he had noticed drinking heavily at the captain's table
confronted him. There was a Mexican girl, pretty in a bold sort of way,
standing beside Nat's accoster, and the man went on: "This lady say you
have insulted her!"

"I have insulted her?" cried Nat, taken, naturally, by surprise. "I
never saw her before and haven't even spoken to her!"

"Nevertheless the señorita say you have given the insult," murmured the
man, and there was a dangerous look in his eyes. "You must to me, her
affianced, give satisfaction."

"Oh, so that's the game, is it?" cried Nat. "Well, I----"

At that moment a shot rang out from somewhere in the crowd back of the
accuser. The first shot was followed by several others, and Nat dropped
to the floor just as the lights began to go out.

A moment later the place was in darkness and there were confused shouts
and cries of alarm.

"At their old tricks!" murmured the sleuth, as he began to crawl toward
a flight of steps leading into the cellar from which the supply of wine
was brought up and of which he had taken note earlier in the evening.




                             CHAPTER XIII

                            IN THE DUNGEON


Nat Ridley was doing some quick and hard thinking as he made his way
like an eel along the floor toward the cellar stairs. He realized that
he was in great danger, but he could not be certain that the shots
fired had been aimed at him.

"If those shots weren't for me, there would have been some coming my
way in a little while," mused the sleuth. "That messenger was sharper
than I thought. He spotted me with El Capitan's letter," and Nat's hand
went to his pocket to make sure he still had the note. He also wanted
to be certain that he had his automatic.

"Tried to force a quarrel on me! That's what they did!" decided Nat as
he hurried to the head of the stairs in the darkness. Fortunately he
had noticed them well when the lights were on, as he had thought he
might have to make use of them.

"I wish I knew more Spanish," mused Nat, who was by this time at the
head of the cellar steps. "I'd like to know just what El Capitan said
when he heard the messenger give me away. Well, I'll have to let that
go and save myself. Whew, they're going it in there!"

Indeed, great excitement now prevailed in the main room of the night
club. Several more shots were fired, but Nat knew now that the bullets
could not reach him. He closed the door back of him and, not relishing
going down unfamiliar stairs in the dark, he took out his flashlight.

This he screened by holding it in his hand so that only the faintest
glimmer came from between his fingers. But it was enough to enable him
to see so he would not stumble.

Nat expected to observe some of the club servants or habitués come
running up the steps at any moment to ascertain what the excitement was
about. But he saw no one, and the change from the noise of the main
room to the comparative quiet of the cellar was a relief. Nat Ridley
was not an admirer of jazz, and loved to be quiet.

He reached the bottom step and noted that the cellar was a large one,
extending in two directions from the flight of stairs. There were dim
lights burning here and there, and in the distance Nat could hear the
tinkle of glasses and bottles.

"They must have private rooms down here, where they have all sorts of
high jinks," reasoned the sleuth. "Well, I'll give it the once over."

There was now no need of using his flashlight, for the cellar had its
own illumination, though not of the brightest, and Nat did not want to
make himself a conspicuous object by holding the little electric torch
in his hand.

He put it in his pocket and, making sure again that his automatic was
in readiness, he stepped out and walked softly along the cement floor
of the cellar.

"Guess I'll give that merry party the once over," decided the detective
as the noise of laughter, singing, and the tinkle of glasses and
bottles became more distinct. "I might pick up some information."

Keeping close to the wall and treading softly, at the same time casting
a look behind him now and then to make sure he was not followed, Nat
advanced toward that part of the cellar whence issued the noise of
merrymaking.

It came from what seemed to be a wine vault, but in which a table was
set with food, and about this were grouped a number of men and women
who were evidently servants of the club.

At this hour of the morning their duties were pretty much over, and it
was plain that they had gathered to enjoy, though in a more limited
way, the same fun as that indulged in by the patrons upstairs.

"I don't believe I care to mingle with them," thought Nat. "It might
arouse suspicion. But it's queer they don't go up to see what all that
row is over their heads."

For the Cordova Club seemed undergoing a raid or something of that
sort. Men and women were rushing about and occasionally a shot was
fired. The band had stopped playing, and Nat could only account for the
indifference of the servants on the assumption that they were used to
all sorts of queer antics on the part of the jazz-mad patrons.

"They don't want to mix in it," reasoned Nat.

He turned aside from the room where the early morning meal was in
progress, and started back the other way. As he turned a corner he
collided, full tilt, with a man.

In an instant Nat had his automatic out and pressed it against the
stranger's ribs, with a whispered order to keep silent. But in the
light that filtered around the turn in the corridor, the sleuth saw
that he had little to fear from the unknown.

He was an old man with white hair and a bent and stooped
back--evidently an aged servant, perhaps the keeper of the hidden store
of wine and liquor.

"Pardon, señor," said the old man in a low voice. "It was my fault--I
did not see you coming."

"Nor I you," admitted Nat, glad that the fellow spoke English. Then
with a happy thought the detective added: "El Capitan sent me----"

He let the sentence end there. It was better not to be too explicit.
And, in a manner of speaking, El Capitan had sent Nat to the cellar.
For had not the messenger made the disclosure, and had not the former
army officer made so threatening a gesture, Nat would still be upstairs.

"Ah, El Capitan--yes, señor. He sends many down here. You are welcome."

Nat was wondering what the answer was to this when the old man whom the
detective had released from the first grip he had taken on his arm,
walked away, making a sign to Nat to follow.

"I wonder where he wants to take me?" mused the sleuth, and he was in
half a mind to refuse to go. But then he wanted to get out of this
cellar before those above discovered that he had come down, and he
thought the old man might show him an exit.

But the man had something else in view, for, muttering to himself, he
led the way until he stopped before a small room fitted with a small
table and two chairs. The table was set for a meal, though there were
no viands on it.

"Pleased to be seated, señor," invited the old man with a deferential
bow. "I will order the food prepared. Doubtless the lady will be here
soon?"

It was a question, and Nat could not conceal his surprise as he asked:

"What lady?"

"Why, señor, the one you are to dine with."

"I haven't any appointment to dine here with a lady," said Nat, with a
grim smile. "There must be some mistake."

"Pardon, señor, no mistake," murmured the old man. "El Capitan said he
would send to me this evening an Americano who would dine in seclusion
with a lady. I made ready this rendezvous, and you come. I but ask
where the lady is."

"And I tell you--" began Nat, and then he held his tongue. He began to
see it now. Doubtless the Mexican had plans concerning another American
and things had gone wrong. The old servant had naturally supposed Nat
was the one expected.

"Let it ride that way," decided the sleuth. "I may find out something
this way. I'm taken for somebody else. Well, I'll play the game." Then
to the old man he said: "The lady--she will be here soon. Get the food
ready. And show me the way out--I mean how to emerge without the need
of climbing the stairs."

"Of a surety, señor, yes, there is another way out. See, you have
but to press here," and he indicated a certain stone in the cellar
wall, leaning against it. At once what seemed to be a section of the
foundation swung back and a short flight of steps was disclosed.

"So that's the way out?" asked Nat.

"That is the way out, after one has dined here with the lady," said the
old man, smiling.

Nat watched him walk out and along the cellar, doubtless toward the
kitchen, for the smell of cooking was plain to the nose of the sleuth.
Nat looked about the room. Aside from the secret staircase, the opening
to which had been closed, there was nothing about it different from
other basement rooms, many of which are used in New York for night
clubs.

"All the same I want to see if I can work that secret door," murmured
Nat. He found, to his satisfaction, that the operation was simple once
it was known what stone to press, and he opened and closed the stone
door.

Then, desiring to make sure he was not being spied upon, the detective
stepped outside the private room. He moved a little away from the
entrance and as he did so he heard, near at hand, a girl's voice crying:

"Oh, don't! Don't strike me again! I can't stand it!"

The heavy tones of a negro woman snarled:

"I's done got to beat yo' ef yo' don't sign dem papers for de captain!
Stand up now an' take yo' medicine!"

"No! No!" pleaded the other voice.

Nat Ridley leaped into action. The voices seemed to come from behind
the cellar wall, but he flashed his light and saw a heavy wooden door
in the wall near the door of the private room.

It was the work of but a moment for the detective to swing back the
door, which was closed but not locked, and then he found himself
looking into a veritable stone dungeon, in the middle of which knelt a
beautiful, blonde girl.

Standing over her, with a blacksnake whip upraised, was a powerful
negro wench.

"Don't! Don't beat me again!" pleaded the girl. But the lash fell with
stinging force across her back.




                              CHAPTER XIV

                               THE BOMB


"Stop!" cried Nat Ridley in a ringing voice as he leaped forward and
stood in the circle of light cast by an electric bulb suspended from
the ceiling.

"Stop!" he cried again, and the Negress who had raised the lash let
it fall as she turned in astonishment to look at the intruder. "Hit
her again," hissed Nat in a low voice, "and I'll tie you up, you black
wench, and cut you into ribbons with that same whip!" It was no time
for polite talk, the sleuth reasoned.

"Oh, save me! Save me!" pleaded the girl, and she started to crawl
toward Nat, for she had slumped over at the first blow.

"I'll save you all right!" returned Nat grimly, as he took out his
automatic. "What is it all about, anyhow?"

"Oh, I don't know! I was kidnapped a few days ago and brought here to
this terrible place! Some Mexicans visited me several times and wanted
me to sign some papers. When I wouldn't they said they would make me.
And this is the beginning of that, I suppose," the girl sobbed.

"What sort of papers did they want you to sign?" asked Nat, wondering
if he was going to be involved in another mystery. The double dagger
and the oil wells were enough for one man at a time, he thought.

"They were papers--" began the girl, when the Negress who had backed
away at Nat's entrance seemed to recover her courage. She lurched
forward and snarled:

"Keep yo' mouth shet, white girl, ef yo' wants to see daylight ag'in.
Don't talk!"

"Don't mind her," advised Nat. "I am here to help you if I can."

His interference seemed to anger the Negress, for she took a step
nearer her captive, again raising the lash as she exclaimed:

"White man, ef yo' knows whut's good fo' yo', beat it!"

Before the lash could fall Nat Ridley leaped at the hideous black
creature and tore it from her grasp. He brought it down with stinging
force across her shoulders, causing her to scream with pain and rage.

The next moment Nat had put his hand over her mouth, for he did not
want her to give the alarm. With the other hand he caught up a rag he
saw on the floor and in a trice had gagged the Negress.

"Oh, to think I am no longer in her power!" murmured the girl, who rose
to her feet and sat down in one of the chairs. "Can you help me get out
of here?"

"I'm going out myself," declared Nat, "and I'll take you with me. So
that's your game, is it?" he exclaimed as, having gagged the black
woman he leaped aside in time to escape a kick from one of her big feet
clad in a heavy shoe. "Well, I know a trick worth two of yours."

A skillful motion of his foot and he had tripped the wench. She fell
heavily and before she could roll over Nat had tied her hands and feet,
with the long lash of the black snake whip. Then he rolled her into a
corner and proceeded to take stock of the dungeon and the girl captive
he had saved.

"How strong you are!" murmured the girl, clasping her hands. "I never
thought I would be saved. You came in the nick of time."

"You have to--in this business!" returned Nat grimly. "Now then, if you
can tell me something about yourself and why you were brought here,"
he went on, "I may be better able to help you. We can't stay here too
long. I expect some of that crowd will be down before long, looking for
me," and he pointed upward. The noise of the crowd in the Cordova Club
was still audible, though, as yet, none of those from above seemed to
have come down into the basement.

"My name is Cora Ardell," said the girl, who had recovered some of her
composure. "I live in New York, but for the past six months I have been
acting as a stenographer and typist for my cousin in Rolamotaza."

"In Mexico?" asked Nat, as he recognized the name of the town, and also
recalled having seen the name Ardell in some of the Lemberg reports.

"Yes."

"What line of business is your cousin in?" asked Nat.

"He was in the oil business--he owned oil wells," replied Miss Ardell.
"But he doesn't any more."

"Did he sell out?"

"He was killed," was the simple answer.

"Was your cousin's name Carl Lemberg?"

"Why, yes!" exclaimed the girl in surprise. "How did you know!"

"No matter--please answer my questions," said Nat.

"He is my cousin, surely," Miss Ardell answered. "But I didn't mean him
when I said he was killed. I was speaking of his brother Henry. They
are both my cousins, of course. But Carl wasn't killed."

"I am sorry to inform you that he was--a few days ago," said Nat gently.

"What, Carl killed too?" burst out Cora Ardell. "Oh, how terrible! How
did it happen?"

"By the double dagger," whispered Nat, so the negress would not hear.

"The double--" began the girl.

"Hush!" cautioned the sleuth. "She may be listening. Yes, Carl Lemberg
was murdered in New York by the double-dagger gang. They killed Henry,
didn't they, and also August Lemberg?"

"They were both murdered. That is all I know," said the girl. "They had
bought some oil wells in Mexico and, as I was out of a position in New
York, they offered me a good one here. So I came on. Then everything
seemed to happen at once. For several days I noticed that my cousin and
his uncle were worried about certain letters they received. But the
business went on and was paying well. They gave me some shares in the
oil wells in addition to my salary.

"Then, suddenly, one day, Henry Lemberg was killed. He was found
stabbed to death in a lonely place. The police said Mexican bandits had
done it. I didn't know what to do. I was getting afraid. Then August
was killed in much the same way."

"Did the Mexican police do anything?" asked Nat.

"They came and asked a lot of questions and went through a lot of
motions," the girl replied, "but it didn't amount to anything. Then
some of the young men clerks, who had also come from New York with
me to work for my cousin, sent word to Carl in New York and he had a
detective come down to try to catch the murderers. Well, the detective
came, and----"

"His name was Dan Steele, wasn't it?" asked Nat softly.

"Yes. How did you know?" and Cora Ardell looked at her questioner with
widely opened eyes.

"It is my business to know," remarked Nat. "And poor Steele was also
murdered; wasn't he?"

"Yes! Oh, yes!" There was a tearful catch in her voice. "Oh, who are
you, anyhow?" she asked, gazing searchingly at Nat. "How do you know
all these things? Who are you and how did you come just in time to
rescue me from that horrible Negress?"

"In answer to the first questions," Nat replied, still speaking almost
in a whisper, "I will say that I happen to know about the killing of
Dan Steele because he was my friend, and, just before his own murder,
your cousin Carl engaged me to ferret out the men who had killed his
uncle and his brother."

"Then you are a--" began the girl.

But Nat, motioning to the bound wench, made a sign of caution. But he
saw that Cora had guessed his profession.

"Now tell me," went on Nat, "and I must know in order to decide in what
way to act, how did you happen to come here?"

"I was kidnapped and brought here."

"By whom, how, and when?"

"I don't know by whom," the girl answered. "But it was about a week ago
and this is how it happened."

"Tell me all the circumstances that occur to you," urged Nat. "A point
that seems small to you may loom large to me. Omit nothing."

"There isn't really very much to tell," Cora said. "After Henry Lemberg
was killed--murdered I suppose I should say--there was much confusion
in the office. This was doubled when a few days later his uncle was
stabbed to death. The whole office force was thrown into a state of
terror, for we thought a race war had broken out.

"We didn't know how to attend to business, and there was much to be
done, for the oil wells turned out to be more valuable than was at
first supposed. You know my cousins had some wells of their own and
also bought others in which certain Mexicans had interests. These
last wells were not thought to be worth much, but after the Mexicans'
interests had been purchased by my cousins and the Mexicans had left,
these wells proved worth more than all the others put together."

"So I heard," remarked Nat.

"Well," resumed the girl, "you can imagine what a state the business
was in after the two murders. Then Mr. Steele came down to help us
straighten things out. But in a short time he was killed. Then terror
seemed to take possession of all the young men clerks who had been
brought from New York to help with the office business, and they packed
up and went back to the United States."

"What did you do?" asked Nat.

"Why, I stayed on and did what I could to save my cousin's business!"
exclaimed Cora, with spirit. "I wasn't afraid until--until----"

"Well, until what?" asked Nat, as she hesitated.

"Until one day I received a card on which was scrawled a warning to
leave the country," said the girl in a whisper. "I was told that I
would have a week, after that----"

"Well, after that?" encouraged Nat.

"There was no direct threat," said Cora. "In place of words was the
picture of a double dagger."

"I thought so!" exclaimed Nat. "The sign of the Tola gang. I take it
you didn't desert?" he asked.

"No. I telegraphed Carl in New York, asking what to do. I wanted to
save the business if I could, for I had an interest in it, and I knew
the families of the murdered men might be in want. The oil wells are
very valuable."

"I believe so," agreed Nat.

"But before I could get word back from Carl," resumed Cora, "one night
I was called to the door of my boarding place with a Mexican family. I
was told someone wanted to see me. I thought it was a business message.
But as soon as I went out of the house I was seized in the dark, a
blanket was thrown over my head, I was put in an auto, and the next I
knew I was brought here. Since then I have been kept a prisoner, and
several times Mexicans whom I did not know have come here with papers
they wanted me to sign."

"Which you didn't do?" asked Nat.

"No; and I never will! They put the Negress over me as a guard, and
yesterday they gave me what they said was the last warning. It was to
the effect that unless I signed the papers I would be lashed with the
whip until I did. Just before you came one of the Mexicans was down
here, and, when I refused, he told the woman to get the whip. I--I
guess you saw the rest," and Cora finished with a little sob.

"I saw the rest!" declared Nat, with a grim look in his eyes. "And I'm
going to have a hand in the rest. Now if you are able to come----"

He interrupted himself to listen. The noise upstairs seemed to have
quieted down, but there were audible footsteps coming along the
stone-paved floor of the cellar. Nat arose and drew his gun.

"What is it?" asked Cora in a whisper.

"I don't know," was his answer. "But it is best to be ready for them.
Get behind me."

The girl moved into a position of safety just as a big husky Negro
followed by two Mexicans entered the dungeon. They appeared surprised
at what they saw--the wench bound in a corner and a calm white man
guarding the girl prisoner.

"Who is yo'?" leered the colored man.

"What business is that of yours?" countered Nat Ridley.

"I'll soon show yo' what business I has, white man!" shouted the Negro.
"Come on, boys!" he called to his Mexican companions.

Nat Ridley hastily made a plan. Reaching back, he took hold of Cora's
hand and whispered from the corner of his mouth:

"Be ready to follow me! We're going out of here!"

The Negro man seemed to anticipate that something was coming, for he
lurched forward, farther into the dungeon, and cried:

"Get around him, boys! Knife him ef he tries any rough stuff, but doan
hurt de lady." Evidently the Mexicans understood English, for they
nodded and separated, intending to take Nat one on each flank, while
the Negro made a frontal attack.

But suddenly the detective and Cora, who kept close to him, made a leap
to pass between the Negro and the Mexican on the left of the detective.
At the same moment Nat pretended to look behind, and over the heads of
the trio, as if seeing a rescue party and he cried loudly:

"You're just in time, Jake! Take 'em from the back and shoot to kill!"

The ruse worked perfectly, for the Negro and the Mexicans turned,
expecting to see a rescue party. At that moment Nat made a rush,
pulling Cora after him, and, safely reaching the door of the dungeon,
passed between the Negro and one of his helpers.

Turning like a flash, Nat sent a bullet through the dangling electric
light. He then pulled shut the door of the dungeon.

"That will give us a few seconds start," he said to Cora. "Come on!"

"Do you know your way out?" she asked.

"Yes," he answered. "There is a secret stair."

He hurried back to the private room where there was to have been a
quiet supper for two. The various corridors of the underground part of
the club were still lighted.

Nat and his companion entered the room. Further preparations for the
meal had been made, for there was food on the table, but no sign of the
aged servant.

"Now to escape!" cried Nat.

He pressed the stone that operated the door to the secret stair, and
watched it slowly opening. But as the opening widened several loud
shouts and screams of fear came from above.

The next moment there was a heavy explosion, as of a bomb, and a shower
of bricks, stones and mortar fell upon Nat and the girl. There were
a succession of grinding, crashing sounds, and then came darkness in
which Nat and his companion seemed buried under an avalanche of dirt
and stones.

Nat Ridley felt a stinging blow on his head, and then he knew no more.




                              CHAPTER XV

                               IN HIDING


The detective seemed to be walking down a long, dark lane, at the end
of which he saw a faint glimmer of light. The light hurt his eyes as it
grew brighter and the radiance increased as he came nearer to what, at
last, seemed to be the rising sun.

Then, as the pain in his head and eyes became almost unbearable with
the nearness of the light, which appeared to sting and burn him, Nat
Ridley became aware that he was staring at the rising sun--a ball of
golden fire--which shone full in his face, coming through a hole in a
pile of stones. Nat found himself half reclining on some burlap bags
and, as he tried to sit up, he became aware of a soft hand gently
pressing him back while a voice said:

"You had better lie quiet a little longer."

"What happened? Who are you?" asked Nat. Then he saw Cora Ardell
looking at him. Her face was grimy and there was a smear of blood on
it. But she was still beautiful.

"Oh, now I remember," observed Nat haltingly. "We were in the dungeon
and there was some sort of explosion."

"A bomb went off upstairs in the club, I guess," said Cora. "The top
of the cellar fell down on us just as you were going to lead me up the
secret stairway."

"That's it!" exclaimed Nat, as memory came back to him. He moved his
legs and arms, and found, aside from some bruises and stiffness, that
he was suffering but little. No bones were broken, but there was still
that terrible pain in his head. He put his hand to it and felt a large
lump.

"A stone fell on you there, and you were knocked out," explained the
girl.

"Then how did I get here?" asked Nat, for he looked about him and saw
that he was lying in a sort of tunnel of stone, with open country just
beyond. "How did I get here, out of the cellar?"

"I dragged you here," Cora answered.

"What, you--alone?"

"Oh, I am stronger than you think," she went on, with a wavering smile.
"And you know it is easier to drag a person than to carry him. I don't
believe I could have carried you--in fact, I know I couldn't have done
that. But it was comparatively easy after I'd rolled you over on a pile
of bags, to keep the stones from hurting you--it was comparatively
easy to make a rope of some other bags and haul you along."

"But how did you get me up the stairs?" asked Nat.

"There weren't any stairs left after the explosion," Cora replied.
"They tumbled down and made a sort of a runway."

"And you ran up it with me?" questioned Nat, smiling now, as the pain
in his head, caused partly by the rush of blood following a return to
consciousness, began to ease.

"I didn't do much running," confessed the girl. "I had to do a lot of
pulling and hauling. But at last I got you this far and I thought we
had better stay here. I couldn't tell who might be after you--and me."

"I guess they'll be after both of us," admitted Nat. "I may as well
tell you now that I am a detective who was engaged by your cousin to
solve this mystery, just before he, himself, was killed by the Tolas.
There is something terrible about their vengeance!"

"I had begun to believe so," admitted Cora. "What are we to do?"

"That will need to be considered," returned Nat. "First, though, let me
thank you for saving my life."

"Oh, I don't believe I did that."

"Yes you did!" insisted the detective. "It would have been only a
question of time when those Mexicans would have come down in the ruined
cellar to look for me. El Capitan had reason for wishing me out of the
way. I had a letter of his," and Nat put his hand in his pocket and
took out the purloined missive which was still there.

"El Capitan!" murmured the girl.

"Do you know him?"

"I heard the men who kidnapped me speaking of him," Cora answered. "He
is the leader, it seems."

"I guessed as much," answered Nat. "Well, so far, we are out of his
clutches. Did you see what happened to the two Negroes and their
Mexican friends?"

"No. After the explosion everything was dark. But I found a flashlight
in your pocket, and when I saw you were alive, but unconscious, I
started to get you out of the cellar. I went up the place where the
stairs had been, and then I thought this would be a good hiding spot."

"They haven't found us here yet, at any rate," Nat said. "Though it
will be only a question of time, I suppose. It is morning, I take it."

"There is the rising sun," Cora confirmed him. "It is breakfast time,
but we have nothing to eat."

"And I think we would both be a bit better off for something," stated
Nat. "I'm feeling much better now," he went on as he arose and stood
up, for the tunnel, in which he had returned to consciousness, was high
enough for this. He walked around and was quite himself again.

"Where are you going?" asked Cora as she saw him walking back toward
the incline of ruined stairs up which, at more cost and toil then she
admitted, she had dragged him.

"I'm going to see if I can rustle some grub, as the saying is,"
admitted Nat.

"You mean to go back into that dangerous place?" the girl gasped.

"I don't believe it will be particularly dangerous now," Nat answered.
"That is, unless it collapses on me, and I guess all the stones that
were to fall have come down."

"I was thinking of that Negro and the Mexicans."

"Oh, they're gone!" declared Nat. "You can make up your mind that after
such an explosion as that the Paloma police are on the job. We seem to
be quite a little distance away from the Cordova Club, but I imagine
the place is mostly in ruins and there is probably a cordon of police
around it now."

"Then why not appeal to them?" the girl inquired.

Nat Ridley shook his head, then stopped suddenly, for the pain shot
back.

"No," he said. "It is best to let the Tola gang think we perished in
the ruins. If we went to the police it would soon be known. We will lie
low for a time--remain here in hiding. When you're campaigning against
an enemy," he went on, "the more you can fool and puzzle and keep him
guessing the better. We'll let those Tolas think we're out of the
running and then we'll jump in again when they least expect it."

"Then you mean to stay here for a while?"

"Until after dark, at least. We can go out then in comparative safety.
But we'll need some water to drink and some food. There was the
start of a supper in that room of the secret stairs just before the
explosion. I think I can get enough to put us over until night."

"I would like some water," admitted Cora.

"And you need food," added Nat. "You stay here. I won't be gone long."

"Be careful!" she begged him. "These are terrible men!"

He nodded, and then crawled over the uneven pile of stones until he had
found the inclined runway up which he had been dragged. When he saw it
he marveled that the girl could thus have hauled him to a safe hiding
place.

Waiting and listening to make sure the way was clear, and hearing
nothing, Nat Ridley made his way down into what, before the explosion,
had been the room where the aged servant had greeted him. The table
was tipped over and split, rocks and concrete having fallen on it,
but from the heap of débris the sleuth managed to salvage some food.
Fortunately, he also found an earthen jar of clean water. With this he
returned to find Cora anxiously waiting for him.

"I--I thought something happened to you," she faltered.

"Enough has happened, and probably a lot more will," replied Nat
lightly. "But I'm all right for the present. Let's eat!"

The sun rose higher, moving away so that the golden beams no longer
penetrated the tunnel. The two examined their hiding place and
concluded that the tunnel was the secret egress from the Cordova Club
cellar--an exit used in times of trouble.

Nat was considering what his next move would be, and Cora was putting
away what food was left, in readiness for the next meal, when there was
a rattle of fallen stones and a form darkened the hole of the tunnel.

"Someone is coming!" whispered the girl.




                              CHAPTER XVI

                           ON TO ROLAMOTAZA


A number of little caves and caverns had been formed in the tunnel with
its partial collapse, and Nat Ridley, hearing the approach of someone
at the outer end and seeing the darkening of the shaft, acted quickly.

"In here!" he whispered to Cora as he guided her into one of the caves.
He thrust himself in after her and the two remained there, scarcely
daring to breathe. They listened anxiously and heard voices talking in
Spanish.

"I wish I knew what they were saying," whispered Nat. "I can understand
some Spanish, and read it and write it, but I want to make no mistake
about what they are saying."

"I can tell you," and the girl's voice was as low as his own. "I
studied the language before taking this position."

"Good! What are they talking about?"

Cora listened while the voices went on--two of them--and the sound of
footsteps could be heard penetrating the tunnel.

"One said," reported the girl, "that it was useless to look in here
for that pig of a Bill Brice, the hardware man. I don't know who they
mean."

"I do," chuckled Nat. "They mean me."

"But I thought you said your name was Nat Ridley?"

"I assumed a disguise to come here, and also took another name," the
detective replied. "I was Bill Brice for a time."

"Then they are looking for you?"

"So it seems. But what else are they saying?"

Cora listened further and once more whispered:

"One seems to think you might be in here and the other doesn't." There
was a further exchange of excited Spanish talk and Cora added: "There,
the one who says it would be useless to search in here has his way
about it--they are going off."

"Good!" softly exclaimed Nat. "I'd hate to have another fight on my
hands," and he put his automatic back in his pocket.

The two, crouched in the hole amid the shattered stones, listened and
heard the searchers retreating. They had come only a little way into
the tunnel.

"I guess we're safe now," murmured Nat. "If no more come until after
dark, we'll be out of here."

"Where are we to go?" the girl asked.

"That is something which must be considered," decided Nat. "I must
learn more about the double dagger crowd before I will be in a position
to arrest any of them. El Capitan is the leader, I think, but I am not
sure. As soon as I get out of here I'll make up a little different and
scout around. As for you----"

"They will probably be on the lookout for me," interrupted Cora. "Oh, I
am so afraid they will kidnap me again!"

"They probably would attempt to get Cora Ardell into their power,"
admitted Nat. "But I fancy they will have no use for Miss Belle
Stanton, the sister of James Stanton, who has come here looking for a
ranch to buy."

"Who is James Stanton?" she asked.

"I am going to be," chuckled Nat. "And you are going to be my
sister--that is, if you have no objections."

"Of course, I haven't. I need a brother--very much!" and she smiled
wanly at him as they moved back toward the exit of the tunnel where the
air was fresher.

"Then this is my plan," went on the detective. "When we go out of here,
which we will do after night falls, we will so alter our appearances
as to look like a man seeking to buy a ranch and his sister who is
accompanying him. We will find a quiet boarding place where I can leave
you while I scout around a bit."

"But how can you disguise me and yourself?" asked Cora.

Nat took from his pocket a small but very complete make-up box, such as
those used by moving picture actors, and explained how he could change
Cora's face and his own.

"Our clothes won't matter greatly," he said. "But I can change mine a
bit, and I should think, by sort of pinning up your skirt on one side,
perhaps making some flounces or ruffles in it----"

"Oh, how did you know so much about dresses?" asked Cora, with a laugh.

"I was married--once," Nat answered in a low voice. "My wife died when
my son was a little fellow."

"Oh, I am sorry--forgive me!"

"It is all right," Nat said. "Now to business."

They talked over their plans, and Cora told more, as she remembered it,
about the Tola gang. Nat made mental notes of her information. The day
wore on, and no more intruders came to the ruined tunnel. The exit from
it appeared to be removed some distance from the Cordova Club--or what
was left of that organization's headquarters after the bomb explosion.

The two ate again, and drank some more of the water, which kept cool
owing to the evaporation properties of the porous jar in which it was
contained.

Then as the glow of the sunset was fading, Nat began to disguise
himself and the girl, making a much better job of it than was to be
expected under the circumstances.

When it was dark the two went out of the tunnel, first having made an
observation that showed that the way was clear. They found themselves
near a narrow street, or rather, an alley, that led to the main
thoroughfare on which the club was, or had been, situated.

"Let's stroll past and see it," proposed Nat.

"Suppose they discover us?"

"In cases like this the bold way is the best," declared Nat. "They
would never look for us at the very place where they had had you a
prisoner. Come on--it will be perfectly safe."

It was. The clubhouse was not as greatly damaged as Nat and Cora had
feared, but it was put out of use as a club, temporarily at least,
and, as the detective had surmised, the police were in charge. The two
made their way through the curious throng, but there was no sign of El
Capitan or any of his men.

A little later "James Stanton" and his sister had secured lodgings in a
quiet boarding house, and Nat, venturing back to the hotel where he had
left his baggage, claimed it.

He asked the landlady's daughter to go out to buy some clothes for
Cora, explaining that he and his sister had come away in a hurry, and
there seemed to be no thought but that everything was all right.

Having told Cora not to worry, Nat, in his new character, went
scouting about town that evening, frequenting several places where,
so he learned, Mexicans, both Spanish and Indian, fond of nightlife,
congregated. In one way and another he picked up considerable
information about oil wells in general and the Lemberg wells in
particular.

"But I wouldn't advise anybody to take stock in those wells," said a
grizzled plainsman for whom Nat bought some liquid refreshment while
the sleuth himself indulged in a black cigar.

"Why not?" asked Nat. "Not that oil is my line," he added. "I want a
ranch."

"And, as I told you," said his companion, "I can put you on to some
bargains in that business. But if any of your friends are thinking of
buying oil shares, let them lay off the Lemberg derricks."

"Why so?"

"Because it ain't healthy," was the answer. "Too many folks connected
with those wells have passed out."

Nat was interested, but could glean little of real value from
his informant except in a general way, which confirmed his first
suspicions. The Tola gang, either from motives of guarding ancient
rights or for more worldly reasons, since the borings had proved of
such great value, wanted back the wells they had sold.

But certain things which Nat picked up caused him to go to the local
telephone exchange a little later that evening, where he put in a long
distance call for New York. He knew his talk would not be overheard
or cut in on by any outside person if he talked from a booth in the
telephone office.

Presently Nat was speaking to Berry Todd and giving that somewhat
surprised sleuth some instructions, part of which were to be conveyed
to Baldy Stoler.

"Are you all right, Chief?" Berry wanted to know.

"So far," was all Nat said. "I'm counting on you now!"

"And you won't count in vain!" Berry assured him. "We'll soon join you."

When Nat got back to the boarding house he found a note under his door.
It was from Cora and said:

"When you come in, no matter what time it is, slip a note under my door
saying you are safe. I shall not be asleep."

Nat smiled and scribbled on a leaf of his notebook, going out into the
hall to slip it under the girl's door. As he did so he thought he saw
a figure slinking away down the corridor--the figure of a man who
seemed to have been listening at the girl's door.

In a flash, all of Nat's suspicions returned, and he hurried to the
head of the stairs. But there was no one in sight and he thought he was
mistaken and that it might have been either the landlady, her daughter,
or one of the maids making a usual round of the house to see that all
was right.

As Nat slipped the bit of paper under the door he heard Cora's voice
asking:

"Are you all right?"

"Quite so," he replied. "And you?"

"All right. Only I fancy someone is watching outside my window."

"Imagination," said the sleuth in a whisper. "You're all right. Go to
sleep."

Nat slept soundly, so soundly in fact that he had to be called by the
landlady. He had left a message when going out in the evening, that if
he was not stirring by eight o'clock he was to be roused. But he was a
little surprised when he heard the woman's voice saying:

"It is after eight, sir!"

"I'll be right down to breakfast!" Nat said.

"Is my sister up?"

"Your sister isn't in her room, nor has she been down to breakfast,"
said the landlady. "Perhaps she went out for an early morning walk.
None of us have seen her."

Nat stifled an exclamation of alarm that rose to his lips, and,
hurrying into his clothes, went to Cora's room. She was not in it, and
there was some indication of confusion about the apartment. The bed had
not been slept in, but there was evidence that the girl had stretched
out on it without turning back the covers. It seemed she had not
undressed.

"She's gone!" exclaimed Nat.

"Has anything happened?" asked the landlady.

"I--I'm afraid so," was the answer. "Was there any disturbance in the
night--I mean here in your house?"

"I heard you come in," volunteered the landlady, "and then I heard you
go into your sister's room. I heard you talking, and then some time
later I thought I heard you and her going out."

"I didn't go into her room," said Nat, trying not to show his
excitement. "I spoke to her from outside, that was all. Then I went to
bed. But she is gone--she must have gone out after I was asleep."

"Then she went out with some man," said the woman.

"Rather, some man took her out!" cried Nat. "I see it now! They have
kidnapped her again, the scoundrels! I thought I saw someone spying at
her door when I came in. I wish I had searched farther than I did. Yes,
they have kidnapped her again!"

"This is terrible!" gasped the landlady. "I will call the police!"

"No!" Nat stopped her with a gesture. "I will handle this case without
the police. I'm a detective."

He told the excited landlady enough to satisfy her, pledged her to
secrecy, and then began to examine Cora's room. One of the first things
he found was the note he had written her. But scrawled on the back,
though not in Nat's writing was the one word--_Rolamotaza_.

"It's a clew she left for me!" mused the sleuth. "The Tola gang have
taken her there. Well, it's me for Rolamotaza as fast as a train can
take me! The devils! They get ahead of me every time!"

A few hours later Nat Ridley was headed for the Mexican city where the
Lemberg oil wells were located.




                             CHAPTER XVII

                            INTO THE HILLS


Sun-bronzed and wind-tanned, a lone cowboy rode a pinto pony along the
stretch of sand and sagebrush. Now and then, from beneath the flapping
brim of his sombrero, he looked at the faint trail ahead of him, and
now and then he raised the red handkerchief about his neck and wiped
his perspiring face.

"It's a darn long way from here to Times Square," mused the lone
cowboy. "But I've got to go through with it now. Go 'long there, you
pinto!" he called encouragingly to his steed, and the pony increased
its ambling pace.

The sun grew hotter and hotter. It was toward the close of a hot
afternoon, and Mexico, the Mexico of the plains, was never noted for
coolness.

Presently the rider pulled his horse to a stop and slung around in
front of him the canvas covered canteen that had been bobbing against
the pinto's flanks and, as he took out the cork and tilted some of the
warm, brackish contents down his throat, he murmured:

"Sorry, pony, that there isn't some for you, but there's hardly a
hollow tooth full for me. But we may strike the city soon."

The pinto whinnied teasingly as it caught the whiff of water, but there
was none for it and the cowboy had soon urged his animal on again. But
presently he stopped once more, looked long and earnestly at the trail
before him and remarked:

"A sign of life at last. Now if this is somebody besides a Mex maybe I
can get some information. Hop to it, pinto!"

The pony pricked up its ears as it saw and smelled another horse
approaching and broke into a canter, which caused the cowboy to remark:

"That's better! I guess you smell water." But his cheerfulness vanished
as he caught sight of the approaching rider and he remarked: "A Mex
again! Can't get any sense out of him--not with what little I know of
Spanish. Wish Cora was here!"

The advancing Mexican peon stopped as he saw the cowboy pulling rein
and made a greeting in Spanish.

"I don't know what you're saying, stranger," drawled the cowboy, "but
I'm pleased to meet you just the same. Now how far is it to town and a
good drink of water? I've been traveling a week it seems, though I know
it isn't more than a day. Where's this city of yours?"

"No sabe, señor."

"The deuce you don't! Well, I'll have to make motions then, I guess,"
sighed Pocus Pete. "Look," and he opened his mouth, held up his
canteen, pretended to pour out water where there was none and then
exclaimed:

"Rolamotaza--where is it at?"

"Oh, Rolamotaza--Rolamotaza!" exclaimed the other, comprehending now,
but giving the Spanish name of the town the correct pronunciation.
"Pronto! Pronto!"

"You mean I'll get there pronto--soon?" asked Pocus Pete.

The Mexican nodded a vigorous assent, smiled, waved his hand, and
called to his bony horse.

"Well, I'm nearer than I thought then," mused the cowboy. "Guess I
won't turn back to Times Square. Go on, pinto!"

And to such good speed did he urge his mount that a little later he
was guiding the animal down a trail through the hills toward a small,
Mexican village, on the outskirts of which loomed the unsightly oil
derricks.

"Struck the right place, I guess!" muttered the cowboy. "Now if I can
strike somebody that appreciates good, old United States talk I'll be
all set."

He rode through the one and only main street of the town, noting that
the population consisted of cowboys like himself, Mexicans, Spaniards,
Italians, and other foreigners who seemed to be in the oil trade, and a
few women and children. Following the crowd, Pocus Pete found himself
near a combined hotel, saloon, and gambling hall, evidences of all
three branches of trade being well in evidence.

"Say, buddy, can a guy get a feed and something to drink in there?"
asked the cowboy of another of his fraternity.

"Surest thing you know. Where you from?"

"Paloma, and looking for a corral," answered Pocus Pete, as he gave his
name.

"Well, you've come to a mighty poor place for cattle punchin'," was the
comment, as the other announced himself as Lazy Ike Nolan. "It's all
oil down here--oil an' Greasers an' sudden death."

"Sudden death!" exclaimed the other. "How come?"

"It ain't healthy to talk about it," was the answer. "But watch your
step, that's all. I wish I'd never come to the darn place. I'm broke
now and my buddy will be pretty soon if he don't keep away from the
gang he's in there with now, tryin' to rub the spots off the cards,"
and Lazy Ike sighed.

"Maybe you wouldn't take it amiss if I offered to buy you a drink,
pardner," suggested Pocus Pete.

"You could do that twice an' not insult me," was the reply. "Lead me to
it!"

Pocus Pete tied his pony to the hitching rail in front of the "Stella
d'Ora," or Golden Star, as the combined hotel and gambling joint was
named, and, having tossed a coin to a boy who was carrying buckets
of water to the ponies, with motions to water his steed, Pocus Pete
followed his new friend.

There was a bar doing a good business and in a room beyond it several
gambling games going on.

"Name your poison," said Pocus Pete to Lazy Ike as they lined up in
front of the bar. "It's water for mine until I get soaked up. I had a
hot ride."

"Don't blame you, pard," agreed the other. "But I'll have some red
licker if it's all the same to you. There he goes--bettin' his last
cent I know!" he exclaimed as he poured out a generous drink and looked
into the gambling room.

"Who?" asked Pocus Pete.

"My side kick--Slim Jim Burke," was the answer. "I got cleaned out, and
I told him to keep away. But he was so darn sure he could get back what
I lost and make a clean up that he went in. Now look at him!"

He pointed to a cowboy like himself who was seated at a table with
several Mexicans. It was an intense gambling game, as was plainly
evident, and a crowd of spectators ringed the participants.

"Let's saunter in and see what kind of hands your pardner is holding,"
suggested Pocus Pete when he had taken three glasses of water one after
the other, to the no small astonishment of the bartender. But when a
dollar bill was tossed over the mahogany in payment of the water alone,
the whiskey or "red licker," being also paid for, there was a murmur of
approval.

"There goes his last dollar--I know the signs," whispered Lazy Ike to
his new friend as they neared the poker table. "An' now we're both
broke."

It was evident that a final play was being made, and as Pocus Pete
watched the dealing he suddenly stepped forward, laid a hand on the
shoulder of Slim Jim and exclaimed in a drawling but loud voice:

"Don't bet on this hand, buddy. The deal's crooked. That guy," and he
pointed to the Mexican dealer, "is slipping his friend cards from the
bottom of the deck. Lay off it!"

At once there was a chorus of excited shouts from the Mexican
gamblers--shouts in Spanish--and in the midst of it Lazy Ike called to
his "side kick":

"Snap out of it! You're being done!"

Slim pushed back his chair, hardly knowing what it was all about,
showing signs of wonder at the interference of the strange cowboy. But
the dealer and his gambling friends did more than show wonder.

"Who are you?" roared the dealer in fairly good English, as he glared
at Pocus Pete. "How dare you break up our game?"

"Go easy, friend," drawled the other. "Breaking up games when I see a
friend of my friend being double-crossed, is one of the best things I
do. I saw you dealing off the bottom--like this----"

He reached over, picked up the scattered cards and, with the hands of
a master magician, began dealing the cards now from the top and now
from the bottom. He turned up the hand he had given the former dealer,
showing four kings, but hardly had the murmurs of surprise at this
trick died away than Pocus Pete turned over the cards he had dealt to
himself, showing four aces.

"It's easy when you know how," he drawled. "But it ain't healthy for
them as knows," he added.

The disclosure seemed to sting the Mexican gambler to madness.

"Son of a pig!" he spluttered. "I will show you!"

With a rapid motion he drew a gun, but before he could fire Lazy Ike,
whose actions seemed to belie his nickname, had his own weapon out.
There were two reports, one following the other, but Lazy Ike had fired
first and the Mexican slumped down in his chair, the bullet from his
gun singing uncomfortably past the ear of Pocus Pete.

The excitement in the saloon redoubled, and Pocus Pete was drawing his
own gun, for there were ugly looks about him, when Lazy Ike called into
his ear:

"We'd better beat it now, you an' me an' Slim Jim. They won't leave
enough of us to put on a shutter as soon as they get into action. I
guess maybe I've croaked that guy."

"Where are you going?" asked Pocus Pete as he allowed himself to be
urged out of the place between Lazy Ike and Slim Jim.

"We've got to take to the hills," answered Ike. "It won't be safe for
us in town."

It appeared that it was not going to be safe for the trio right then
and there, in the Stella d'Ora, for as the three neared the door they
found their passage blocked by a number of Mexicans.

"Pigs! Dogs!" hissed the dark-featured men, some of whom were far from
sober.

"Kill the Gringoes!" someone yelled.

A big man, whose face showed his passion, rushed at Pocus Pete with a
long knife upraised.

"Watch yourself, buddy!" yelled Ike.

There was a sharp report, a little cloud of smoke seemed to float out
of the side pocket of Pete's coat, and the Mexican slumped down to the
floor.

"Another one down and out!" yelled Ike, the lust of battle in his eyes.
"Now we sure got to make a run for it!"

"That was a slick shot," muttered Slim Jim. "Though who you are an' how
Ike picked you up, I don't know."

"An' this ain't no time to ask questions, either!" sung out Ike. "Come
on! Take it on the jump!"

The three ran from the saloon, leaped to their ponies at the hitching
rail and galloped off.

"To the hills!" cried Lazy Ike. "We'll stick by you, Pocus Pete!"

As they galloped through the town the hoof-beats of their horses
were punctuated with the shots from many guns, while bullets sang an
ominous, whining song over their heads.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                            THE BLACK CAVE


"You fellows know this country better than I do," remarked Pocus Pete
as he guided his pinto pony out among the hills that led away from the
Mexican town where they had just escaped from the gambling den. "I'll
have to depend on you to get me out of here."

"Don't worry about that," drawled Lazy Ike whose speech was, at times,
as slow as his actions. "We'll stick by you to the last."

"Though, for the matter of that," went on the strange cowboy, "those
fellows who were juggling the pasteboards didn't get any more than was
coming to 'em."

"You're darn right!" chimed in Slim Jim. "Say, pard, I gotta hand it to
you for shufflin' the cards! How'd you work it?"

"Just a trick," and Pocus Pete smiled. "But say, do you fellows know
where you are and where we're goin'?"

"You well said it!" exclaimed Lazy Ike, flapping his pony with the
reins. "We know this country all right, an' to our sorrow. I wish we'd
never crossed the Rio Grande."

"Same here," came sorrowfully from his pal.

"What's wrong with it?" asked Pocus Pete. "Too much oil?"

"Too much oil for a cattleman," answered Slim Jim. "An' there's other
things, too."

"What other things?" asked the pinto-riding cowboy curiously. He acted
as though he had long been on the trail of something or somebody and
that now he was nearing the end of his quest. "What other things?"

"You tell him, Slim," urged Lazy Ike. "We got to stick together now,
since that shootin' fracas, so he might as well know what's what."

"Yes," remarked Pocus Pete, "if the cops get after us we're all in the
same boat, I reckon, though you didn't shoot anybody, Jim."

"Not this time. But I gotta couple of notches on my gun handle,"
boasted the cowboy. "Not but what the fellows who stopped my bullets
didn't get what they deserved," he added. "I'm no promisc'us shooter.
It was them or me, an' I'd ruther it'd be them. So the cops, as you
call 'em, are after me, too--only they haven't got onto my curves yet
back there in Rolamotaza."

"Cops," drawled Lazy Ike meditatively. "I ain't heard that word in a
long spell. You must 'a' been East recent, Pocus Pete."

"I'm from the East, originally," admitted the cowboy on the pinto.
"Some of the words stick to me yet. I reckon they ain't got no regular
police out here, have they?"

"These Greasers? Naw!" exclaimed Slim Jim as he shoved a big wad of
tobacco into his mouth. "Con-stab-u-lary--that's what they call 'em in
Mex. Dirty, greasy Greasers--that's all!"

"But they shoot without stoppin' to ask why or wherefor," warned Lazy
Ike. "So we'd best put a few miles between them an' us afore Don Juan
Castro starts the ball game."

"Don Juan Castro?" exclaimed Pocus Pete, and there was so much
excitement in his voice that his two companions looked at him in
surprise and Jim asked:

"You know him?"

"I've heard of him," was the answer. "He's a big cattle man, isn't he?"

"Naw! Oil," and Jim got rid of some of his tobacco juice. "He owns
a lot of oil wells around here an' he's always tryin' to git more.
There's some wells here owned by a party out your way--in the East, I
mean--N' York, I heard. Well, this Don Castro and his gang are after
them wells."

"They tried to buy 'em," added Ike. "An' when they couldn't do that,
well, some queer things begun happenin'."

"That's what I was goin' to tell you about," put in Slim. "This country
ain't no good for cattle--it's all oil, an it ain't healthy for them
as dabbles in oil, 'less they're in right with Don Castro."

"What happens?" asked Pocus Pete.

"They passes out--sudden like," answered Slim and he made a motion as
if sticking a knife into someone. "An' that ain't the worse of it,
neither," he went on.

"No?" questioned Pocus Pete.

"No, sir! There's signs that them as passes out sudden has been done
away with by a secret society. There was certain signs left near each
dead man, an' three was killed lately to my certain knowledge."

"That's right," chimed in Lazy Ike. "Three!"

"What was the mysterious sign?" asked Pocus Pete.

"It was a sign of a double dagger drawed on a card found near the dead
men," resumed Slim. "An' in one of the bodies, a regular double dagger
was found--a knife with a big blade on one end an' a small blade on the
other. Looked like if they didn't get you goin' they would comin' or
visse versy as they used to say when I went to school."

"So they found the double dagger in one of the victims, did they?"
asked Pocus Pete.

"It was left stickin' in one of the stiffs, if that's what you mean,"
chuckled Lazy Ike.

"Where it is? Who has it? I mean where is that double dagger now?" and
Pocus Pete showed so much excitement that both his new friends looked
at him in wonder. Then Slim added:

"It didn't stay in him long. Feller named Steele, it was. An' he got
steel--cold steel--poor slob! This is how it come about. Ike an' me we
moseyed down here lookin' for work, an' when we found it weren't no
cattle country we sort of stuck around, pickin' up odd jobs. It wasn't
so bad at first, though we didn't have no great hankerin' for oil. An'
then the queer killin's begun.

"But about this double dagger you seems to be interested in. One
mornin' a young feller we happened to know--he was a college boy who'd
run away an' he got a job down here. He used to ride off by himself a
lot, alone. One mornin' he come racin' back to town, his pony all a
lather of foam, sayin' he'd seed a dead man out in the gully, an' he
had a double dagger stuck in his heart. That's how it was knowed the
killin's was done with that kind of a knife."

"So they found the double dagger, did they?" asked Pocus Pete.

"Well, Jimmie Dale--that was this college lad's name, saw the knife
stickin' in poor Steele," went on Slim. "But when some of us went out
there with a few of what passes for police around here, the knife was
gone."

"Who took it?"

"Nobody could tell. Likely it was some of them that drove the double
dagger into Steele's heart. They must 'a' knifed him and then got a
scare that sent 'em off on the run 'fore they had time to pull the
knife out. Then they come back an' got it."

"Looks as if they cared a lot for it," commented Pocus Pete.

"Reckon so," came from Ike. "Well, now you know what sort of country
you've drifted to, Pete, an' I hope you like it."

"I've been in worse places," was the cool answer. "If there is food and
water to be had up in these hills I reckon we can hold out."

"Oh, there won't be no trouble about that," declared Slim. "We know a
few places to hide."

"The black cave, for one," suggested his pal.

"That's right. We'd better head for that."

"As for grub," went on Ike, "there are a lot of Mexican farmers up in
these hills, an' they'll sell us skinny chickens an' them fried beans
they call frijoles or tortillas or somethin' like that. An' there's
plenty of springs, so we'll make out all right."

"Then we'll camp for a while," suggested Pocus Pete. "As it's my fault,
in a way, that you were forced to flee--vamoose you know--" He seemed
to have, for the moment, swung out of the cowboy slang. "As it was my
doin's that you had to come here you'll let me buy the grub."

"Don't know's we'll have much objection to that," said Slim. "We're
about broke."

"That's right," nodded Ike. "But how do you figger it's your fault,
Pocus Pete, that we're here because of you?"

"Well, if I hadn't butted in on that card game when I saw Slim being
double-crossed----"

"Forgit it!" broke in the cowboy gambler. "I was jest gittin' wise to
their game myself, an' I'd likely have started somethin' if you hadn't.
No, we're all in the same boat, an' we'll stick together."

The trio rode on. The ponies were fleet, and soon took them beyond
pursuit, which, as a matter of fact, did not last long. Perhaps the
Mexicans did not relish the quick shooting of the cowboys.

They rode up among the hills and stopped at a farm, run by a peon and
his wife, where Pocus Pete footed the bill for food--it was not a
costly meal, a dollar buying enough for all three.

That night they camped in the open, rolled in blankets near a fire, and
the next morning traveled on, for Ike and Slim said the black cave, a
natural cavern in the hills, would be reached about noon.

The sun was not yet at the zenith when Lazy Ike, pointing ahead on the
trail, drawled:

"There she is!"

"What?" asked Pocus Pete.

"The black cave."

The newly arrived cowboy glanced to a dark opening in the side of the
hill, and, as he looked, he said in a low voice:

"Somebody's ahead of us."

"What do you mean?" asked Slim.

"I mean there are some fellows in the black cave. What had we better
do, boys? This is your game."

Lazy Ike and Slim Jim peered from beneath their sombreros at some
horsemen coming out of the cavern.




                              CHAPTER XIX

                                PURSUED


"What you reckon that means, Ike?" questioned Slim Jim.

"Doggoned if I know. Looks like somebody had preëmpted our claim, don't
it?"

"Somethin' like that," agreed the other.

"Are you two guys supposed to have a claim on this black cave?" asked
Pocus Pete as the three reined in their horses and stood looking at the
other cavalcade of riders--perhaps half a dozen--who came out of the
cavern as if aroused at the sight of the trio.

"No, we ain't got no more of a claim than anybody else," said Ike. "But
Slim an' me, we sort of found this cave when we first come to this oil
region, and we lived in it a few days when we was sort of gettin' the
lay of things. We've often been back to it between times, but never
before did we see anybody in it."

"That's right!" chimed in his friend.

"An' now there's a mob here," went on Pocus Pete. "It must mean
something."

"It does!" agreed Lazy Ike. "An' I don't like the looks of it."

"Same here," mused his pal. "An' would you look at that!" he exclaimed
as there was a movement among the horsemen at the black cave. "I'll be
darned if they ain't headin' our way!" he cried.

It was so. The six horsemen urged their steeds to a trot along the
trail toward Pocus Pete and his two friends.

"They're after us!" cried Jim.

"Sure as you're a foot high!" echoed his pal.

"What had we better do?" asked Pocus Pete as he took out his automatic.

"No, don't shoot," advised Jim. "We wouldn't stand much chance against
twice our number. Those aren't Greasers. They're some of the gang that
hangs around the Stella Dora," so he pronounced the name of the Golden
Star café. "They can shoot."

"You mean they are some of Don Castro's gang?" asked Pocus Pete.

"You got me! We'd better give 'em a run for their money."

So, turning their horses about, the three raced along the trail they
had come, while, with shouts that had anger in them, the other horsemen
took up the pursuit. A few shots rang out, the bullets whizzing
uncomfortably close to the heads of Pocus Pete and his friends.

"Ain't that jest the rottenest luck!" exclaimed Jim as he leaned over
his pony's neck to give less of a target to their enemies.

"Sure is!" agreed his pal. "I figgered on takin' it easy in that cave
for a while, an' now we got to sweat leather again. Well, I guess we
can beat 'em at that."

"They aren't catching up to us, at any rate," observed Pocus Pete. "Our
horses are fresher than theirs, I take it."

"You take it right, friend," admitted Slim Jim.

"Have you any idea where you are heading for now?" went on Pete.

For a few moments the three rode on without this question being
answered. The pursuers, though distanced at first, were still coming
on, and, though hidden by turns in the trail, the pattering of their
horses' feet could still be heard.

"Yes, where you aim to pull up, Slim?" asked Ike.

"What about the Indian's Nose?" asked Slim.

"Not bad. It's a good place to camp, an' we can see a good ways off
when anybody's comin'. How does that strike you, Pocus Pete?"

"Well, I guess," was the answer as the new cowboy urged his pinto pony
along. "I'm a stranger here. I'll have to leave it to you. But if it
means goin' among the Indians----"

"It's only a name of a mesa about twenty miles farther on," was
the answer. "It's elevated land, a fine place to camp, water an'
everything. A little game to shoot, too. An' you can look for a mile or
two each way so you can see when anybody's comin' to make trouble. What
say?"

"I say let's head there, if we can shake these fellows off," said Pocus
Pete with a look back. But the pursuers were not in sight.

"Snap into it!" called Ike, and the three rode on. But ever as they
made a turn in the trail among the hills, they could hear the men from
the black cave coming behind them. It was not until nearly noon that
they lost the sound, and then Ike said:

"Guess we can take it a bit easy now. There's two or three forks in the
road that we passed an' those fellows may have taken one."

"In that case we can let our horses rest," suggested Pocus Pete, for it
was high time they pulled rein.

They found a spring of water and with the food they had brought with
them from the Mexican farm they drank and made a meal, feeling much
better after that.

Then, as they were preparing to mount again and keep on to the Indian's
Nose, Pocus Pete arrived at a decision. He looked sharply at his two
companions and said:

"Boys, I've got something to tell you."

"Spill it," laconically advised Jim.

"I'm not a cowboy," was the next statement.

"We knowed that long ago!" chuckled Ike.

"An' as long as you ain't the sheriff, we don't give a darn!" went on
his partner.

"How'd you know I wasn't what I pretended to be?" asked Pete curiously.
"By the way I ride?"

"No, you ride pretty darn good, if you ask me," said Ike.

"It's the breaks you make in speakin' now an' again," said his
companion. "An' 'cops'! Bust me for a wall-eyed pike, soon as you said
'cops' I knowed you wasn't no cowboy--at least, not from around here.
But you don't have to tell us, mister. We ain't cravin' to know your
secret. We got some of our own."

"But I want to tell you," went on the other. "I don't like the way
things are breaking down here. And I don't like the way those men from
the black cave are coming after us. Something may happen. A stray
bullet might just clip me, and----"

"You're right there," admitted Slim Jim gravely. "So if you got
anythin' on your conscience----"

"Oh, it isn't that," and Pocus Pete laughed. "But the ends of justice
might suffer if I happened to be killed and no one knew who I was or
why I came here."

"Then you're the sheriff after all?" and Ike and his chum looked a bit
reproachfully at their companion.

"No, I'm not the sheriff, and I'm not after you fellows. I'm Nat
Ridley, a private detective from New York, and I'm down here to avenge
the murder of a fellow detective--Dan Steele!"

"By thunder!" voiced Ike vigorously.

"A detective!" gasped Slim. "Whatchu know about that!"

"And I'm on the trail of the double dagger gang--Don Castro among
them," went on Nat. "Can I count on you to help me?"

For an instant the two cowboys hesitated--but for an instant only. Then
with one voice they exclaimed:

"You sure can!" And they held out their bronzed hands.

But a moment later Ike added:

"If we're goin' to help you the best advice I can give you now is to
beat it right now!"

"Why?" asked Nat Ridley, alias Pocus Pete.

"Because them fellers are after us again!"

The others listened and heard once more the tattoo of hoof-beats.




                              CHAPTER XX

                            OVER THE CLIFF


Leaping into their saddles again, the three horsemen were soon pounding
down the trail and away from their pursuers, who seemed to be coming on
after them relentlessly.

"They must be powerful anxious to meet up with us," drawled Lazy Ike as
he rode beside Nat Ridley.

"They are--for more reasons than one, I fancy," replied the detective.
"It isn't altogether the row in the gambling den that makes them want
to catch us, though we did put two of their men out of the running."

"Then they want you more than they do us?" asked Ike as he urged his
well-going pony to a faster pace.

"That's it. And if you boys want to slide off the trail and let me lead
these fellows a chase alone, don't hesitate," suggested Nat.

"What the blazes do you think we are?" snapped out Jim. "We ain't
Greasers!"

"I should say not!" cried his pal. "Leavin' a buddy in the lurch ain't
our style!"

"I didn't think it was," said Nat Ridley quietly. "But I thought it
only fair to give you the chance."

"Well, don't give us no more chances like that," ordered Jim.

"We don't like 'em!" echoed Ike.

And the three rode on.

The two cowboys, in spite of the fact that they were rather loose
livers, free spenders, and not very provident, seemed to know their
business, which was riding and picking out a good trail. During the
period they had been in Mexico they had made good use of their time
and knew considerable about the country. It was to them, more than to
anything else, that Nat Ridley owed what success he had in this trail
after the double dagger gang.

The one and only thing in favor of the detective and the two cowboys
was that they had better horses than those ridden by the men who had
come out of the black cave.

"What I think is this," said Nat when his two companions asked him
how he "figgered out" the gang got to the cavern ahead of them. "The
crowd in the gambling joint must have known that you two boys were in
the habit of hiding in that cave. Then when you lit out with me, they
naturally reasoned that we'd make for here. They must have taken a
short cut to get here ahead of us."

"There ain't no short cut!" declared Ike.

"If there was we'd 'a' taken it," added Jim. "Most like they pushed
their horses on hard to beat us, an' that's why the ponies ain't goin'
so fast now."

"Perhaps," admitted Nat.

"That's it, sure!" declared Lazy Ike. "An' lucky we kept our mounts
pretty fresh. Well, we're sure runnin' 'em now," he added, and, indeed,
it was calling on all the reserve in the ponies to make them trot along
the trail which now led upward.

But luck was still with the trio in advance, and it was not long before
they had distanced their pursuers and could pull up their ponies for a
breathing spell, which was badly needed. The three men dismounted and
picketed the animals in a little glade, where Ike found a spring. But
the heated horses were not allowed to drink at once, though it was with
the utmost difficulty they were held back until they had cooled off a
bit.

Then when they had been allowed to slake their thirst and the three
were resting, Nat Ridley told a little more about himself and his
mission in Mexico.

"Besides being on the trail of the murderers of the three Lemberg men
and my friend Dan Steele," said the detective, "I want to save a girl
they kidnapped."

"A girl!" exclaimed the two cowboys.

"Yes, a Miss Cora Ardell," and Nat related the finding of the girl in
the dungeon, being beaten by a Negress, and how the two had escaped.

"But they kidnapped her, right out from under my nose, you might say,"
went on the detective. "It wouldn't do my reputation much good to have
that generally known," he admitted, with a wry smile. "But it happened,
worse luck. And except for the fact that Miss Ardell left a scrawl,
indicating that the scoundrels had brought her to Rolamotaza and of
some things she told me in the States, I wouldn't know where to look,
though I might have picked up the trail later."

"You say that pretty girl is here?" asked Ike, and, unconsciously, he
began to knot his neck handkerchief more carefully.

"I think she was brought to that Mexican town," went on Nat. "But I had
no chance to look for her before that row in the saloon started, and
we've been kept on the jump ever since."

"On the jump is right," admitted Ike. "But I think we'll get to
Indian's Nose soon, and then we can laugh at 'em."

"I'm not so sure of that," said Jim. "But we'll have a better chance,
anyhow. Why are those Tola devils after the girl?" he wanted to know.

"She owns a share in the oil wells the Mexicans want to get back,"
stated Nat. "She was also the secretary of her cousins, the Lembergs,
and she may have certain papers which, if the rascals could get them,
would aid them in regaining possession of the wells. And now they have
Miss Ardell in their power again, and I don't know how to help her."

"Just wait," advised Jim. "Soon as we can give these fellows the slip
we'll swing around, cross over the Border, and get a posse of good old
cowboys who'll come back and clean out this gang."

"I wish that might happen," replied Nat Ridley. "But I'm afraid we'll
have a lot of trouble and be in some danger before that comes to pass.
These fellows are as cruel and relentless as their ancient Aztec
ancestors."

They pushed on to such good advantage after their rest, during which
Nat took occasion to ask his new friends to send word to the Times
Square office should the detective be killed and the others escape,
that when night came they were in a lonely region, where many trails
crossed and the cowboys gave it as their opinions that the pursuers
could never follow.

"They can't pick out which trail we took not even if they had a
detective like you, Mr. Ridley, to help them!" declared Ike.

"Not in a thousand years!" agreed Slim Jim Burke.

"So much the better for us," said Nat.

That night they slept in the barn of another Mexican farmer, for whose
benefit, should he be questioned later, they used false names and
talked of searching for a stray bunch of horses. At the farmer's house
they bought food and ate heartily.

The night was one of anxiety because, in spite of the confusion of
trails, it was possible that Don Castro and his crowd might come upon
them. Nat explained his previous encounters with this one of several
plotters, and also mentioned El Capitan.

"We've heard of him," said Ike.

"And no good, either," added Jim.

However, the night passed peacefully, and in the morning, after a
hearty breakfast and having purchased a supply of food to last for
several days, they again took the trail.

Several times at favorable places during the forenoon they stopped to
look back and also to listen, but they neither saw nor heard any signs
of pursuit and they began to feel that they had distanced their enemies.

It was just getting dusk when Slim, who was riding in advance, gave a
shout that sent the blood pumping faster into Nat Ridley's heart.

"What is it?" called the detective anxiously.

"Indian's Nose," was the reply. "We're there!"

A little later the three rode out on a mesa, which made a good place
to camp and also, because of the nature of the country, afforded a long
outlook to the south, whence pursuit, if any, must come.

"What's to the north?" asked Nat, as they prepared to camp for the
night in a little grove of trees.

"The jumpin' off place," answered Ike.

"He means the mesa ends there, and there's a high cliff as straight
as a chimney that drops down to the trail at the foot of the mesa,"
explained Jim.

"Oh," mused Nat. "Well, I hope we aren't chased off this plateau."

"Not much danger, I reckon," said Jim. "They won't find us here."

The night passed peacefully, and they were just finishing breakfast the
next morning when Ike, who had gone to see that the horses were all
right where they had been picketed, came running back, much excited and
shouting:

"They're coming!"

"Who?" asked Nat.

"Don Castro's gang or somebody he's sent after us! They're comin' up
the gully, and if we want to get past we've got to fight!"

Hardly had he spoken when around a bend several horsemen appeared,
many of whom carried rifles or shotguns. Not expecting the approach
of the enemy so soon, the three had not begun to keep a watch, and the
Mexicans had stolen up on them in the darkness of the early morning
hours.

The mesa, though elevated, was long and narrow, like a nose, after
which it was named, and the approach to the camping place of Nat
and the cowboys was through a gully, so narrow that not more than
three could ride abreast. Now this defile was fairly choked with the
approaching horsemen.

"What are we going to do?" asked Ike, as he saw the desperate nature of
their chances.

"Fight 'em!" snarled Slim Jim Burke.

"They'd wipe us out!" murmured Nat Ridley. "I'm no coward, as I guess
you know," he went on, while the others exclaimed:

"We'll say you aren't!"

"But it would be madness to ride at them in that narrow place," went
on the detective. "We might shoot our way through, but, more likely,
one or all three of us would be riddled. And I don't want to pass out
before I've saved that girl and made the Tola gang pay some of their
debts."

"Then what'll we do?" asked Jim.

"How high is that cliff?" asked Nat.

"Too high to jump down, and no pony could slide it," said Ike.

"I don't intend to jump, and we'll have to abandon the horses," went
on Nat. "But I guess it isn't too far to get over by using our lariats,
is it?"

"The ropes! By jingo, I never thought of that!" cried Ike.

"We can do it!" exclaimed his pal. "And they can't follow, for I don't
believe there's a rope in their outfit. They aren't cattlemen. By
thunder, Mr. Detective, you've struck it!"

"We'll go over the cliff!" exulted Ike.

"Fasten the ropes together then," advised Nat, drawing his automatic,
and dropping down behind a rock.

"What are you going to do?" asked Jim.

"Give 'em a few shots to hold 'em back until you can make ready," was
the answer. "If they rushed us at the last minute we wouldn't have a
chance. But I think the bushes will screen our movements until we are
ready. Hop to it now, boys!"

The cowboys ran to get their ropes from their saddle horns, and soon
came back with the three lariats. Ike stopped in his tracks and
exclaimed:

"But look here, Mr. Ridley! We got to shinny down these ropes, you
know! Nobody can't lower us. And when the last man is down the ropes
will still be hangin' to whatever we fasten 'em to."

"That's so," added Jim, for a moment discouraged. "I never thought of
that. We'll have to leave the rope for these devils, an' they'll come
down after us."

"No they won't!" declared Nat. "We'll use a double rope, putting the
turn of it around that stunted tree on the edge of the cliff. When we
are all three down we'll pull one end of the rope and it will slide off
and fall down. We won't leave any for them to use."

"By thunder, I never thought of that!" gasped Ike. "Come on, Slim!"

A moment later the two were preparing the way of escape over the cliff
while Nat Ridley, kneeling behind a clump of bushes amid the rocks,
began firing on the horsemen who were urging their steeds up the rocky
defile.

Could he hold them back long enough? That was what Ike and Jim were
wondering as they hurriedly knotted together the three strong lassoes.




                              CHAPTER XXI

                            A SHOT IN TIME


Nat Ridley's shots in the direction of the advancing Mexicans had
hardly ceased rattling amid the rocks of the defile on top of the mesa
when the detective hastened toward the edge of the cliff whereon grew a
single stunted tree, but strong enough for the ropes to be looped over,
thus supporting the men as they went down hand over hand.

"Are you ready?" asked Nat as he saw Jim, who had been kneeling beside
his chum, arise.

"Just got 'em all hooked up," was the answer.

"How about you?" asked Ike. "Did you hit any of 'em?"

"A few, I think," answered Nat grimly. He spoke the truth, for his
bullets had found marks, bringing to their knees several of the Tola
gang, though the sleuth fired to wound and not to kill.

"Snap into it now!" cried Ike. "We haven't any time to lose."

"That's right!" agreed Jim. "They're coming!"

Indeed, down the defile could be heard the ringing of the steel shoes
of the horses on the hard rocks.

But by this time the combined lassoes were rigged and, by leaning over
the cliff, it could be noted that they extended in a double line to the
bottom where a road wound off through the trees and bushes.

"Who's to go first?" asked Slim, as the three paused for a moment on
the edge.

"Let Mr. Ridley," suggested Lazy Ike, with his usual drawl. It was
noticed that since Nat had revealed his identity the cowboys, having
learned who he was, were much less free and easy with him.

"Sure--he goes first!" agreed Jim.

"No," objected Nat. "Without wanting to boast, I may say I'm a better
shot than either of you. So if it comes to a rush I can pick off more
with my automatic than you can with your guns," and he slipped another
full magazine in his weapon.

"There's truth in that," said Ike. "Well, then, Slim, it's between you
and me."

"Snap into it!" ordered Nat. "Here, you go first," he ordered Slim
Jim, as being the faster of the two. "Then Ike can slide down and I'll
follow. Quick!"

The others were willing to abide by the detective's decision and a
moment later the languid cowboy was hanging to the lariats and had
slipped over the edge of the cliff. He went down quickly, and his chum
was half way to the bottom when the nearer approach of horses and the
sound of voices told Nat that the Mexicans were coming on fast.

"Hurry!" advised Nat, and Ike went so fast he blistered his hands, hard
as they were.

Nat Ridley, thrusting his automatic into a fold of his coat, to have it
in instant readiness, now began the descent. As his head and shoulders
disappeared below the edge of the cliff, the first of the pursuers came
into view.

"There he is! The dog! The pig!" cried someone in Spanish-accented
English.

"Ah, there spoke Don Castro, or I am mistaken!" chuckled Nat.

Suddenly, after having lowered his head over the rim of the cliff, the
detective raised himself again, holding on by one hand and by twisting
the ropes around his legs. Then he sent several shots into the ranks of
the Mexicans, making a hit with each report.

There were yells of rage and cries of pain, and having thus forced the
advancing horsemen to a temporary halt, Nat began the descent.

"Stop him! Get the pig! Cut the rope!" yelled Don Castro.

But before this could be done Nat had reached the end of the lariats
and had joined Ike and Jim, who stood anxiously waiting.

"Did they shoot at you?" asked Jim.

"No, I peppered them," answered Nat.

He pulled quickly on one side of the double rope, thus slipping it
loose from around the anchoring tree, and as the free end rose, the
face of a Mexican appeared at the top of the cliff and his hands made
an endeavor to snatch the combined lariats before they could fall. It
was evident the pursuers had no ropes of their own to use in making the
descent.

But Nat, with a quick jerk, pulled the lassoes off the tree, and the
coils fell at his feet. Then, calling to Ike and Jim to run on, the
detective took a shot at the man above him. A howl of pain succeeded
the crack of the automatic and the sleuth knew he had clipped his man.
Two Mexicans shot in return, but nobody was hit.

"We're safe now for a time," remarked Ike, with a sigh of relief.

"I hope so," assented Nat. "But where are we going?"

"We can't go far without horses," remarked Jim with a sorrowful air. "A
cowboy without a pony is like a sailor without a ship."

"We may be able to pick up something to straddle before very long,"
said Nat. "I'd be very glad to buy some extra horses if we could find
them."

"Gee, you're a sport!" vowed Ike.

"This is business," declared the sleuth. "What are our chances?"

"Well, we may strike a ranch where we can get three broncos," said
Slim. "But they won't be much good. No worse, though, than the nags
on which they've been riding after us. Gee, I sure do hate to lose my
pony!"

"I'll see that you get another," promised Nat. "But if we have to walk,
aren't we likely to be overtaken by those fellows, even if they have
very poor horses?" he asked.

"I'm not worrying about that," declared Jim. "There's no trail down off
the mesa short of half a day's ride, and they aren't going to try the
cliff, I guess. No, we're safe for a time."

Then the three began walking along. They were soon lost to view in
a grove of trees so that there was no danger of those on the cliff
shooting at them, and then they plodded on.

All the rest of that day they marched, halting only when the sun was
hottest. They found another Mexican farmer who supplied them with
food, and at night they reached a small village where they stayed for
the night in an unoccupied adobe hut. But their quest for horses was
unavailing.

"Better luck to-morrow," suggested Nat as they rolled in their
blankets, for they had brought their packs with them when they slid
down the rope at the cliff.

The detective's prophecy was borne out a little later, for a traveling
horse-dealer came into the village the next day and offered to sell
three steeds at prices which the cowboys said were outrageous.

"This is no time to haggle," declared Nat in an aside. "We want to get
back to Rolamotaza. I've got to do what I can to save Miss Ardell."

So the ponies were purchased, together with saddles and bridles, and
though Jim and Ike bewailed the fact that the animals were nothing like
the ones they had lost, still it was the best that could be done under
the circumstances.

Once more mounted, the three, having purchased food, started off,
intending to head back to the village to which Cora Ardell had
indicated she was being taken by her abductors.

How it happened none of them knew, least of all Nat Ridley, but toward
the evening of the third day after their escape over the edge of the
cliff, the three were riding down a trail amid the hills, and, rounding
a turn, Ike suddenly exclaimed:

"Look where we are!"

"By jinks! What do you know about that?" cried Jim.

"Where are we?" asked Nat.

"On the trail back to the cave!"

"You mean the black cave?"

"Surest thing you know! Say, this is luck!"

"Maybe not so much as you think," suggested the detective. "If that
same gang is in there----"

"They're out. They're after us!" chuckled Ike. "This is the best ever!"

"Are you sure you're right?" asked Nat, as the two compared notes about
landmarks.

"Certain sure!" answered Ike. "We'll be at the cave in ten minutes.
This is the back trail leading to it."

In even less than the time mentioned the two cowboys gave shouts of
delight and pointed to the same dark hole in the overhanging rocks that
Nat had viewed several days before.

Slim Jim kicked his pony in the sides to spur it forward and approached
the cave with a rush. But, just as he reached it, to the horrified
surprise of Nat and Ike, a Mexican rushed out, thrust a long pole
between the legs of Jim's horse, bowling that none too steady animal
over, and bringing the rider to the ground.

With a yell of rage, the Mexican, raising aloft a long knife, rushed
at the prostrate man, who was stunned from the fall. And, with a thrill
of terror, Nat Ridley recognized in the Mexican's hand the dreaded
double dagger.

"Look out, Slim!" yelled Ike. But his shout did no good.

Like a flash, Nat Ridley drew his automatic and fired in the nick of
time. As the report rang out, the Mexican, with a shriek of pain and
rage, dropped the two-pointed knife from a hand that was reddened with
blood.

Nat had shot the weapon from the assassin's fingers, and not a moment
too soon. A second later and it would have been buried in Slim's heart.




                             CHAPTER XXII

                            THE TOLA EMBLEM


But if the detective and the cowboys with him thought they could
silence this raging Mexican with one shot, they were soon to find out
to the contrary.

"Dogs and pigs!" hissed the man as he leaped to his feet, for the shock
of the bullet in his right hand had sent him spinning around so that he
fell. "Pigs!"

"Seems to be their pet word!" chuckled Nat, as he eyed the fellow.

The detective did not give the Mexican credit enough for brute courage
and indominable grit. But no sooner was the Mexican on his feet than he
made a rush for the double dagger that had fallen to the ground near
Slim.

"Grab that knife!" yelled Ike, sensing the fellow's intention.

But Slim was still dazed by the fall from his tripped horse, and not
capable of action. It might yet have gone hard with him had not Nat
Ridley fired again.

This time the sleuth did not risk shooting at the hand which held the
double-pointed knife--the left. It appeared that the Mexican could use
either fist for stabbing. Instead Nat aimed at his head.

Such an accurate shot was the detective that he could have sent a
bullet through the assassin's head, but he was more merciful than was
the member of the Tola gang, and only shot off one ear.

As the bullet gave him this injury, the Mexican, with a scream of
terror and pain, dropped the double dagger the second time and then
fled down the road that ran in front of the black cave.

"That's the last we'll see of him!" cried Ike.

"There may be more," observed Nat. "Get your gun ready while I go take
a look at Slim."

Ike drew his heavy revolver, but no others of the gang came from the
cavern, and while Ike stood guard Nat bent over the stunned cowboy.
Luckily he was only stunned, and when he had recovered the wind that
had been knocked out of him he looked up at Nat, started to rise and
murmured:

"Thanks, old man. Hope I can do the same for you some day."

"I don't want to be in as tight a place as that," remarked Nat. "I like
a little bigger margin."

"I sure thought he had you!" exclaimed Ike while Nat walked to where
the emblem of the Tola gang had been dropped by the murderous Mexican
and picked up the double dagger.

"A nasty weapon," observed Slim as he got to his feet, little the
worse for his fall. The horse was not hurt, and after scrambling up
and running on a little way, was now cropping grass. "He sure did me a
dirty fall," he added, dusting off his clothes.

"You're lucky," commented Ike. "Mr. Ridley fired just in time. Look
out, sleuth," he added as he heard the detective give a surprised
exclamation. "Cut yourself?" he asked.

"No," Nat answered. "But this is a trick dagger. Look here!"

He held out in his hand what seemed to be only the handle of a knife.
Both blades had disappeared. But, as the cowboys watched, the shining
points of steel sprang into view again.

"What's the idea?" asked Ike.

"The blades appear and disappear by pressure on a spring hidden here,"
Nat said, indicating where, amid the carving on the handle, a little
head of a grinning Aztec god appeared. "Look!"

The detective worked the mechanism, which he had discovered by
accident, causing the blades to shoot out and in with a sinister
suggestion of the injuries they could cause in the hands of a Tola.

"That's a bad knife," remarked Ike.

"The Tolas have a miniature one like it, which they use as a pin to
fasten their cards on the bodies of their victims," Nat informed his
friends. "The points of the little dagger are doped in some way so the
person about to be murdered is rendered helpless."

"Better look out that the points of that double dagger aren't smeared
with dope," advised Slim.

"I'll be careful," Nat promised. "I'll sheath the blades before I put
it in my pocket," and he suited his action to his words.

"What are you going to do with it?" asked Slim.

"I don't know yet," was the answer. "But I have an idea that with it
I can get hold of some of the secrets of the Tola gang. Now at last
we're at the cave where we wanted to hide. But I am in two minds about
it. Since getting this dagger, I have half a notion to go back to
Rolamotaza and have a look for Miss Ardell."

"Let's rest a bit," suggested Slim. "I don't feel as chipper as I
might."

"Oh, I didn't mean to rush off now," remarked Nat. "We'll spend the
night here in the cave."

"Maybe we'd better find out first," suggested Ike, "whether there are
any more of the gang in there."

"It is hardly likely," said Nat. "They would have come out after what
has happened--the shooting and the talking."

They picketed their horses--Ike said it was an insult to good cow
ponies to call the three "crow-baits" by that name--and started for the
cavern. But they had no sooner entered it than they became aware that
it was inhabited, at least by a voice.

Out of the depths, in which showed a glow from either a lantern or a
candle some distance in, echoed a pleading voice:

"Help! Help! Don't leave me alone this way! Help!"

Something like an electric shock went through Nat Ridley. He uttered an
exclamation, drew his powerful flashlight from his pocket, and ran back
into the cave, while the cowboys, after a startled look at each other,
followed.

"Miss Ardell--Cora!" cried Nat. "Is that you? Are you here?"

"Yes! Yes! I am! Oh, is that Mr. Ridley? Thank heaven you have come to
save me! Oh, help me!"

"That's just what we'll do, lady!" declared Slim.

"Surest thing you know!" added Ike, and both cowboys began rearranging
their neckerchiefs, though the cave was too dark, even with the glow of
a lantern and Nat's flashlight, to show any personal adornments.

"This must be the girl the sleuth was telling about," murmured Ike to
Slim.

"That's right--the one kidnapped in Paloma. He sure is playing in great
luck!"

Cora Ardell it was, a bound prisoner in the black cave. Nat Ridley soon
freed her of the bonds.

"What happened and how did you get here?" asked the detective, when the
girl had been given water to drink and led to a seat on a rude, wooden
bench.

"That night after you came in late at the Paloma boarding house,"
related Cora when she had recovered her composure, "I fell asleep. I
was awakened by feeling a hand over my mouth. I tried to get up, to
scream, and to fight my assailant, but I was not able. I guess they had
drugged me. I remember dimly that they asked me certain questions and
that I answered, though I don't know what I said.

"Then they made me walk with them out of the house--two men in masks.
It was as if I was in a daze. I dimly remember being put into an
automobile, and then I came to my senses in this cave. I have been a
prisoner here ever since, and the men have taken turns in demanding
that I sign papers giving them back the oil wells."

"Did you?" asked Nat.

"I did not! They said they would kill me unless I signed, but I said my
friends would rescue me. There were a number of men in this cave all
the while. I think it must be the headquarters of the Tola gang."

"It begins to look so," admitted Nat. "But they must have only recently
taken over this place, for you saw no signs of them when you two were
here before, did you?" he asked the cowboys, and they answered in the
negative.

"The other day," went on Cora, "there seemed to be a sudden alarm. All
the men rushed out and I was left alone with an old Mexican and his
wife. He has been my jailer ever since. I must say he did not treat
me cruelly, though he kept me bound. Then the woman went away this
morning, and I did not know what to think. A little while ago I heard
horses approaching."

"They must have been our nags," remarked Ike. "And that rush the other
day was after us."

"Yes," assented Nat. "Well, what happened then, Miss Ardell?"

"My Mexican guard suddenly rushed out a little while ago," the girl
reported, "and then I began to work the gag from my mouth. I heard
shots, and I struggled to free myself and shouted for help. Then you
came in."

"I'm glad we did," replied Nat Ridley emphatically. "Your guard is out
of the way," and he told something of what had happened. "The gang of
Tolas left this cave to chase us," he went on. "But we gave them the
slip and got back here by a roundabout way. They haven't returned yet,
it seems."

"And will we be here when they come moseying in?" asked Ike.

"Not if I know it!" declared Slim. "I don't like the looks of their
double daggers!"

"No, we sha'n't stay here," decided Nat Ridley. He had quickly made up
his mind to a daring plan for rounding up the Tola gang, now that he
had in his possession one of their double daggers.

"With your help, my cowboy friends," said the detective, "I'll have
these scoundrels just where I want them. Can I count on you?"

"You bet!" came fervently from the pair.

"Then," said Nat Ridley in a low voice, "this is what I intend to do."




                             CHAPTER XXIII

                             THE DEAF MUTE


Within the silence of the dark cave, where, for days, Cora Ardell had
been kept a prisoner, a secret conference was held. All the talk was in
whispers, for Ike and Jim declared that they did not know enough about
the cavern to insure that a listener might not be hidden in some recess.

It was even suggested that perhaps the Mexican whom Nat had shot twice
might have sneaked back in an endeavor to get revenge, or, failing in
this, to learn something of the plans of his enemies.

"We can't be too careful," whispered Nat, and so the low talk went on.

Following this conference, Ike hurried from the cave and went to a
Mexican farmer whom he knew and purchased food with Nat's money, for
the sleuth had come over the line well supplied financially. Cora,
after the nerve-racking ordeal of being a prisoner had ended, became
herself, and told much that she had overheard while bound in the cave.

That the cave was one of the headquarters of the dreaded Tola gang was
well established, and it was only by chance that the two cowboys had
not encountered the ruthless El Capitan Martolo, Don Castro and their
followers on the visits Ike and Jim had paid to the cavern.

"Well, then," remarked Nat Ridley, one afternoon, about two days after
the shooting of the double dagger from the hand of the Mexican who
would have stabbed Slim Jim, "I'll leave you three for a while. Take
good care of Miss Ardell," he warned the cowboys.

"We will," promised Ike.

"I'm not worrying a bit," the girl said.

"And we'll be on the lookout to join you," added Jim.

They watched the detective ride down the trail and out of sight.

While the cowboys were carrying out their promise to guard Cora Ardell
carefully, quite a different scene was taking place in the Mexican
village of Paz, some miles from Rolamotaza.

In a Mexican saloon, combined with which was a gambling joint, seated
around a table in a rear room were El Capitan, Don Juan Castro, Valdez
and a number of the other members of the secret society known as the
Tola--an offshoot of some of the terrible organizations of the Aztec
days. The talk was all in Spanish.

"It seems then," remarked the big El Capitan, "that our men did not
get the American detective pig?"

"He escaped, to our sorrow," remarked Don Castro, who was telling the
story.

"How?" snapped El Capitan.

"He and his cowboy companions abandoned their horses and lowered
themselves over a cliff. We could not follow."

"How was that? Why not?" demanded El Capitan, his eyes blazing.

Don Castro shrugged his shoulders and waved his hands expressively as
he replied:

"They pulled the ropes away so we could not slide down."

"Imbeciles!" snarled El Capitan. "Why did you not have ropes?"

"It was a mistake not to," admitted the leader of the baffled pursuers.
"But we had none. However, we still have the girl in the dark cave, and
it will be strange if she can hold out much longer. If she signs the
papers, giving us back the oil wells, we can snap our fingers at this
dog and pig of a Gringo detective."

"Perhaps," said El Capitan. "But he is very clever. Out of my pocket
from under my nose he took letters--letters that say too much. Tell
me," he went on with a change of manner. "Have you tortured the girl
yet?"

"No, El Capitan," answered the other. "We did not know you wanted to
go to that length."

"Go to any length! Do anything to get her to sign those papers. It
is my order. Use hot irons if necessary. Now go and don't come back
without the papers! Are you sure you have the girl safe?"

"Positive, El Capitan."

"That is good. We shall yet laugh at this pig of a Gringo."

El Capitan chuckled and ordered another drink, and while he was pouring
it down his throat a waiter glided to his side and whispered in his ear.

"So?" exclaimed the Tola leader. "One of our band from the mountains to
join us? Who is he? Does he bear the symbol?"

"He gave me this," and the waiter held out a card on which was drawn
the device of a double dagger.

"That is good, but it is not enough. He should have the weapon itself,
either in miniature or the large one. But I will see him. Don Castro,
your attention here before you go to the cave on your mission," and El
Capitan beckoned to his lieutenant.

"Yes, El Capitan," submissively responded the other. "What is it?"

"One of our band--or at least one so claiming--waits outside. He sends
in his card. He is from the mountains it seems. He may be Pedro from
the cave."

"If he is, it means that something has happened!" cried Don Castro,
starting. His manner was alarming.

"You mean the girl has escaped?" hissed El Capitan.

"It is possible."

"If she has, you imbecile, I will hold you responsible!" stormed the
leader. "But let us see! Have in this member from the mountains. He
sends the proper card but he must have the dagger itself. Let him come
in," he ordered the waiter.

A moment later an aged Mexican entered the meeting room of the Tola
gang. White was his hair, bent was his back and he walked with a staff.
He bowed humbly as he advanced and seemed eager to please as he stood
before El Capitan.

"Who are you and what do you want?" snapped out the leader.

The old man appeared not to hear, and something in his manner caused El
Capitan to exclaim:

"We are betrayed! This is a spy! Speak!" he cried, slipping his hand
into his coat as if seeking a weapon.

"Pardon, señor, I forgot to mention that he is a deaf mute," said the
waiter. "He had to write out on a card that he wanted to see you, and I
had to write that I would take him your message and the symbol, which
I did. He can neither hear nor speak."

"Fool, why did you not say so at first?" snarled El Capitan. "I had
nearly put a bullet through him, and that would have been sad if he
is really one of us. Look you," he went on to the stranger who stood
meekly before him, "why do you come? What do you want?"

"You forget, El Capitan," said Don Castro, gently, "that he cannot hear
you."

"True enough," grumbled the head of the gang. "Give me paper and
pencil!"

"Make sure that he is one of us," suggested Don Castro.

"Am I not doing that?" testily inquired his chief.

He wrote something on a card which the deaf mute read, though slowly,
either as if his eyesight were poor or his brain slow to comprehend.
But comprehend he must have, for with a smile and a mumbling of sounds
that were not words, he drew from his pocket a curiously carved handle.

Pressure on a certain ugly head among the decorations caused two keen
blades to shoot out--one long and the other short.

"The double dagger!" murmured several who had crowded about El Capitan.

"Yes, he bears the emblem," admitted the chief. "He is one of us.
But it is going to be devilish hard to get much out of him. I hate
writing. However, I will see what his mission is."

But hardly had El Capitan begun to frame some questions in writing than
there rushed into the meeting room a Mexican with a hand done up in
bandages, and with but a bloody smear where, once, an ear had been.

"Pedro!" gasped Don Castro. "Pedro!"

"From the cave?" El Capitan.

"From the cave!" answered the wounded Tola. "They shot me and they have
the girl!"

"Ten thousand devils!" yelled El Capitan. "Speak! Who has the girl?
What do you mean? Who? Tell me! We are lost!"

He started forward as though to seize the messenger and shake the truth
from him, but Don Castro stepped forward, while the deaf mute, putting
the double dagger, in which the two blades were once more sheathed,
back in his pocket, drew quietly into a corner.

"Let me talk to Pedro," suggested Don Castro. "What happened to you and
who took the girl?" he asked quietly.

Then followed a flood of talk, hearing which El Capitan yelled:

"It is that dog of an Americano detective again. Always he turns up
unexpectedly. He must die! Quick, call in Valdez and Latro. Set the
killers on his trail! He must die! Dog! Pig! Thus to baffle us!"

"He must die!" echoed Don Castro, a wicked smile playing over his face.
"But to kill him we must first catch him, and I think Pedro will help.
Let us go into conference. And what of this deaf and dumb member from
the mountain, El Capitan?"

"His matter can wait. He can hear nothing--tell nothing. Let him wait,"
and he made a sign to the aged Mexican who had shown the double dagger
to take a seat in the corner whither he had retreated, there to wait
until the more important matter of planning Nat Ridley's death could be
disposed of.

The deaf mute sat down wearily, as though he had traveled far, and he
closed his eyes. But there was a curious little smile playing over his
brown and wrinkled face.




                             CHAPTER XXIV

                             OVER THE LINE


Late into the night, yes, almost until the red sun was ready to rise
and shine down into the village of Paz amid the Mexican hills, did El
Capitan, Don Castro, Pedro and the "killers" hold conference in the
back room of the adobe saloon. Now the voices were high pitched and
now they were low, and all the while the deaf mute sat in his corner,
nodding, sleeping, and sometimes smiling.

At last a plan was agreed upon and certain men of the company girded
their pistol belts tighter about them. They were given money by El
Capitan and then they went out into the gray and reddening dawn to
where their horses awaited.

"Fail not!" ordered the big chief. "The son of Gringo pig must die!"

"He shall die!" promised Latro, with a cruel smile on his face. "We
shall meet with our comrades in Paloma and it will be strange if,
between us, we shall not find him."

"In Paloma, then, I will join you on the day agreed," said El Capitan.

Again the brown and wrinkled deaf mute in his corner smiled. Then the
leader seemed to remember the mute messenger with the double dagger,
for he turned to Don Castro and said:

"Now we shall see what he wants. A pest upon him for coming at such a
time! It is money he desires, I doubt not."

And money was just what the aged member of the Tola gang had come for.
It appeared, from what he wrote down on dirty pieces of paper, that he
was a member of a distant branch of the gang that had its headquarters
in the mountains. It was composed of poor peons, but they had been
promised a share in the oil wells, the profits of which were to be
divided among the Tolas.

It further appeared that El Capitan, Don Castro and the others, not
having sufficient funds of their own to wrest back from the Lemberg
family the wonderfully profitable wells, had levied contributions from
every member of the gang, rich and poor, promising in return money when
the wells should once more be owned by the ancient society.

"And this fellow says he and his fellow villagers are so poor from the
failure of their crops and because of the money they have given us to
get back our wells that they are starving," said El Capitan when he had
read what the deaf mute wrote. "A pest upon them! Why could they not
wait?" He walked the floor in anger.

"What is to be done?" asked Don Castro.

"What would you have?" retorted El Capitan. "We cannot afford
disaffection. These mountain members, though they add little to our
success, must still be considered. But I am tired of this pencil
scratching, Castro. You deal with this mute. Write him that if he will
wait a few days he shall have money to take to his friends. By that
time we shall have our wells back."

"If we get the girl and kill that devil of a detective--maybe," added
Don Castro, with a shrug of his shoulders.

"We will!" declared the leader. "Deal you, Castro, with our member from
the mountains. Pacify him--tell him to wait and all will be well."

"I suppose he is a member," suggested the other.

"Did he not have the double dagger? Who else but a member would dare
show it? He is a true Tola. Treat him well. And now we shall hope for
the best. I am weary--I would sleep!"

So while El Capitan staggered off to his room, Don Castro wrote more
messages to the deaf mute who read them slowly--and smiled.

It was several days after this, during which time El Capitan, together
with several of his most trusted men, had departed on a mission, that
Don Castro, sauntering one day into the café headquarters of the Tola
gang, inquired for Zenna, which, the deaf mute had written, was his
name.

"He is gone," the café proprietor answered.

"Gone?"

"Yes. He left in the night. Someone came to him with a note and he
departed hurriedly. Why? Was I supposed to detain him? Is all not
right?"

"I don't know about the last," said Don Castro slowly. "I hope so.
Certainly you had no orders to detain him. I wonder if he was a Tola."

"He had the double dagger," replied the café owner, who was also one of
the ruthless gang. "I saw him springing the blades in and out as he sat
here early in the evening."

"Yes, he had the double dagger," agreed Don Castro. "But I wonder--I
wonder!" Then, with a shrug of his shoulders he added: "But El Capitan
said he was one of us, and El Capitan should know."

Meanwhile the bent and aged deaf mute was making good time over the
mountain trails on the mule that had brought him to the village of Paz.
And, as he hastened forward, now and then he took out the double dagger
and looked at it. Ever and anon he smiled, wrinkling his bronzed face.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a little adobe hut, long and narrow, several men were gathered one
hot, sultry evening. Two of the party were cowboys, by their dress.
One spoke in slow, drawling tones and moved but seldom. The other was
tall and slim.

Two others of the party were evidently Easterners, as their pale faces,
in contrast to the bronzed complexions of their companions, plainly
showed.

"Well, Baldy," remarked one of these latter, "we're a long, long way
from Times Square."

"You said it, Berry!" responded the other. "But this is the place the
chief told us to report to, isn't it?"

"You got it right, gentlemen," said the tall, thin cowboy. "Me an' Lazy
Ike doped this out as the best place to pull off the party; didn't
we, Ike?" he asked his companion who had gone into another part of
the long, low building which was divided in the middle by a partition
containing a door. "Where's Ike?" he asked, looking at Baldy and Berry.

"I crossed over into Mexico to get me a match for my cigarette,"
answered Lazy Ike, coming through the door. "Now I'm in the U. S. A.
once more," he went on as he sat down with the others.

"Is it true?" asked Baldy Stoler of Slim Burke, "that this building is
right over the line between the United States and Mexico?"

"You got it right, buddy," was the answer. "It was built for a saloon,
after prohibition started, so liquor could be sold to thirsty United
Staters who didn't want to go into Mexico. They could come in here and
imbibe and still be on Uncle Sam's land. In case of a raid the red-eye
and forty-rod could be hustled over to the other side of the saloon, on
to Mexican territory, and the prohibition people couldn't do a thing.
It got so, after a while, that the United States authorities and the
Mexican government made an agreement and this place was wiped out
by a joint raid. Since then this shack is in charge of the military
authorities of both countries."

"And when Nat telephoned Baldy and me to come here," said Berry, "and
when we met you two cowboys, you said this was the best place for the
trick."

"It is," asserted Slim Jim. "It's just over the line, you see."

Others in the crowd listened to this talk. Hard-fisted men they were,
and ready with their guns. Baldy looked at his watch and remarked:

"It's about time he was here if he's coming."

At that moment a door in the Mexican end of the building opened and an
old man shuffled in. Bent and wrinkled he was, and stained and dusty
from long travel.

"What do you want?" called Ike sharply. "Who are you?"

"Excuse me, señor, but I am deaf and dumb," was the reply.

For a moment this remarkable statement seemed to shock them all into
silence, and then Berry Todd laughed and cried:

"It's the chief himself--Nat Ridley!"

"Hush!" cautioned the detective, for he it was. "They are on the way.
They will soon be here. Into the other room with you--the United States
side and wait for my whistle. Have your guns ready."

"That's something we won't have nothin' else but," declared Lazy Ike
with his characteristic drawl.

A little later the aged Mexican seemed to be alone in the long, narrow
building that straddled the international line. He sat in a chair,
waiting, waiting, with a queer smile on his brown face.

Presently he heard the sound of horses ambling along the road, and the
smile changed to a stern expression. He rose as several men opened the
door and came in, El Capitan and Don Castro among them.

"He is here!" exclaimed the leader, glancing at the Mexican. "I thought
he was one of us, though you doubted him, Don Castro. Now then,
somebody, write and ask him where he has the girl and that pig of a
detective. I must have a drink," and El Capitan drew out a flask while
Don Castro wrote the questions of his chief on a piece of paper which
he handed the old Mexican, who had appointed this rendezvous after his
sudden flight from Paz.

But the deaf mute seemed to have some difficulty in reading the
writing. He held it up beneath a candle spluttering in a wall sconce.
And, as he raised his arms, Don Castro gave a cry of alarm.

"What is it?" cried El Capitan, nearly choking himself as he stopped
his drink half taken. "What is it?"

"We are betrayed!" shouted Don Castro. "See! This man is no peon! He is
in disguise! His skin is stained! I doubted him from the first. Now I
am sure!"

With a quick motion Don Castro pulled back the sleeve from the upraised
arm of the man reading the note. And while the hand and wrist were
stained a mahogany brown, the remainder of the arm was glistening white
skin.

"Son of a pig!" hissed El Capitan as, from an inner pocket, he drew his
double dagger and sprang toward Nat Ridley.




                              CHAPTER XXV

                              THE WHISTLE


Thought was hardly quicker than Nat Ridley's act as he pulled loose his
sleeve from the betraying grip of Don Castro and leaped toward the door
dividing the long building in two. As he glided from the grasp of the
Mexican, the latter gave a cry of dismay.

"After him!" shouted El Capitan. "He must not escape again! He knows
too much!"

"Devil of a spy!" cried some of the other Tolas who, with their
leaders, had come over into the United States in furtherance of their
plans and because of certain things the deaf mute had written in his
notes. The mute had promised to deliver into their hands Nat Ridley the
detective, and to tell where Cora Ardell could be found.

"Spy! Spy!" yelled the baffled and enraged Mexicans, while El Capitan
seemed actually to foam at the mouth.

"He said he would deliver Ridley to us!" cried Don Castro.

"And he is here!" cried the ringing voice of the supposed deaf mute.
"Nat Ridley is here! Come and get him! I am Nat Ridley, at your
service!"

He leaped into the other room, which appeared to be vacant. After him
rushed El Capitan, Don Castro and the "killers." Each one held either a
double dagger or a gun.

For a moment it seemed that Nat Ridley would be either killed or
captured. But the same smile that had wrinkled the brown face of the
supposed Mexican now corrugated that of the sleuth and he shouted:

"Come in and get me!"

Into the room--occupied only by the detective it seemed--rushed the
Tola gang.

Then Nat Ridley put a whistle to his lips and blew a shrill blast.
Instantly certain boxes along the sides of the room were shoved aside
and there appeared two cowboys and Baldy Stoler and Berry Todd and a
number of United States revenue officers, each one grim of face and
holding two guns.

"Betrayed! Betrayed!" snarled Don Castro.

"All is not lost yet!" shouted El Capitan. "We are on Mexican soil.
These pigs of Americanos cannot arrest us!"

"There's where you're wrong!" cried Nat Ridley, his hand in his coat
pocket. "You're on United States soil. There's the international line!"
and he pointed to a black mark running along the floor just where the
door was set in the partition. "You're in the United States and you're
all prisoners!" his voice rang out. "This is the end of the Tola gang!"

"Not yet!" snarled El Capitan. "The double dagger will be avenged!"

He leaped at Nat with the two-pointed knife he drew from his coat,
but as he sprang there was a sharp report, a puff of smoke from the
detective's pocket, and El Capitan crumpled up on the floor, a bullet
through his heart.

"It is my turn!" yelled Don Castro.

He drew his gun and aimed at Nat from behind. But Berry Todd saw the
motion and the detective's gun spoke once. Don Castro went down, the
bullet striking him in the mouth as he opened it to yell his defiance.

Several of the Mexicans began firing, but they were poor shots and the
bullets flew wild, while the guns of the cowboys, the three detectives,
and those of the revenue officers did fearful execution. Several of the
Tola gang were killed, and the others, in a panic of fear, threw down
their weapons, raised their hands in the air, and cried out that they
surrendered.

"Well, then, I guess this is about all," remarked Nat Ridley as the
cowed wretches were led away to the Paloma jail, the fight having taken
place on the outskirts of the city. "Is Miss Ardell all right?" he
went on. "Where is she?"

"You can see for yourself," remarked Slim Jim. He went to a side door,
opened it, and Cora entered.

       *       *       *       *       *

So ended the reign of terror instituted by the Tolas when they found
that the oil wells were more valuable than had been supposed. With the
leaders slain and most of the principals in jail, the order was all but
wiped out. In some ways it was a lawful secret society, and there were
good members of it, particularly in the mountains among the poor and
honest peons.

But the Tola had been corrupted by El Capitan for his own ends and
those of his friends, and the forcing of the oil wells from the
Lembergs, who were lawfully entitled to them, was only part of their
plans.

Nat Ridley had learned all their secrets while in their headquarters
disguised as the deaf and dumb Mexican. He learned how the deaths of
the three Lembergs had been brought about, and from the persons of the
slain and captured men were taken several large double daggers and a
number of the small ones, with the drugged points--emblems used to
strike terror to the hearts of the enemies of the Tolas.

"Dan Steele is avenged," said Nat when, having resumed his own
character, he was ready to go back to New York with Berry and Baldy.

"And my cousins' widows and the other heirs will be in undisputed
possession of their oil wells," added Cora Ardell. "My own interests
will also be safe now, thanks to you," she said to Nat with a grateful
smile.

They were soon on their way north in a train, for the girl decided
that she had had enough of Mexico. Certain trusted agents were left in
charge of the oil-well property.

"And when will you send in your bill?" asked Cora presently.

"What bill?" came from Nat, wonderingly.

"The bill for your services," said the girl. "I want to pay my share,
and I know, my cousins' widows will also. How much do we owe you?"

"Nothing at all," was the prompt answer. "What I did was done to rid
the country of a desperate gang and to avenge my friend Dan Steele.
It wasn't a question of money. I don't want a reward. Dan Steele is
avenged!"

"Good and plenty!" echoed Baldy Stoler.

And then Nat Ridley settled back in his seat for a well-deserved rest.


                                THE END



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75909 ***
﻿
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75927 ***





Transcriber’s Note

Page 23—the word ‘redpoles’ have been left as originally spelt.

Page 62—presbyterian changed to Presbyterian.

The Footnotes have been changed to a numeric order and placed at
the end of paragraphs they relate to.

The book cover is labelled - “Labrador and its people, Grenfell”,
whereas the book is officially entitled, “Vikings of to-day, or
life and medical work among the fishermen of Labrador.”




VIKINGS OF TO-DAY


[Illustration: S.S. PRINCESS MAY.]




    VIKINGS OF TO-DAY

    OR LIFE AND MEDICAL WORK
    AMONG THE
    FISHERMEN OF LABRADOR


    BY

    WILFRED T. GRENFELL, M.R.C.S.E., L.R.C.P.
    _Holder of the Board of Trade Certificate of Competency
    as Master Mariner_


    ILLUSTRATED FROM
    ORIGINAL PHOTOGRAPHS

    [Illustration]

    FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY
    NEW YORK CHICAGO TORONTO
    _Publishers of Evangelical Literature_


    Dedicated

    BY KIND PERMISSION TO

    HER ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUCHESS OF YORK,

    _whose practical and gracious interest in the welfare of
    these far-off “Toilers of the Deep” has served in
    no small way to assist this enterprise, and to
    fire with loyal affections the hearts of
    England’s sons across the sea_.




PREFACE

BY FREDERICK TREVES, F.R.C.S.,

_Surgeon to the London Hospital. Examiner in Surgery at the University
of Cambridge. Chairman of the Hospital Committee of the Mission to Deep
Sea Fishermen._


At the present time—near to the close of the nineteenth century—we
are being constantly reminded, with somewhat unpleasant persistence,
that the human race is degenerating and that the changes of decay are
most marked among the most civilised people. It is among the young
men especially that these unwelcome signs of the times are assumed to
be the more noticeable. It is claimed that the splendid physique and
the heroic courage of the British race are both deteriorating, and
that those who seek for the time of noble deeds and sturdy hearts must
turn back to the days of Elizabeth—to the stirring times of Drake and
Raleigh.

There is said to be no longer a field for that pluck and daring, or for
that determination and persistency, which at one period made the name
of the British famous throughout the world.

It would be idle, in this place, to inquire into the substance of these
moanings and regrets, and it would be reasonable perhaps to allow
that there may be some real or apparent element of truth in these
lamentations over the man of the present.

Be this as it may, it will be agreeable to those who are most concerned
in these forebodings to turn to the record contained in this volume,
while those who view with some disgust the fashionable youth of the
day, with his many effeminacies and affectations, will find in the
pages which follow some wholesome relief to their distaste.

Dr. Grenfell’s narrative will take the reader away from the heated,
unnatural and debilitating atmosphere of the modern city, from the
enervated crowd, from the pampered, self-indulgent colonies of men and
women who make up fashionable society, and will carry him to a lonely
land where all conventionalities vanish, and where man is brought into
contact with the simplest elements of life and with the rudimentary
problems of how to avoid starvation and ward off death from cold.

The present volume deals with a land of desolation, with a country
hard, relentless, unsympathetic and cruel, where, among fogs and
icebergs, a handful of determined men are trying to hold their own
against hostile surroundings and to earn a living in defiance of dreary
odds.

When the Mission to Deep Sea Fishermen resolved to send an expedition
to Labrador, it was evident that the man to go with it was Grenfell.
He was well known both at Oxford and in London as a hardy athlete; he
was a skilled and able surgeon; he was profoundly interested in Mission
work; and the sea had for him that magical attraction which a few
centuries ago emptied nearly every little cove and fishing hamlet in
Cornwall and Devon of its heartiest men, and carried them over the high
seas to the ends of the earth.

Grenfell went, and the good work of the Mission was established on the
Labrador. It was no little matter to bring into the hard and desperate
life of the Labrador fishermen a touch of kindly and practical sympathy
from the old country. It was no little matter to travel for many
hundreds of miles along a grim, inhospitable coast, where buoys and
beacons are unknown and where there is scarcely a bay or island which
has not been the scene of some lonely disaster.

It will be seen from this book that the race of Vikings is not
yet extinct, on the one hand, and that on the other the spirit of
enterprise and daring is not yet lost to the English people, and that
the modern rover of the sea differs from his predecessor in little save
the motive of his expedition.

Those who know how to value the comforts of an English home, and who
can appreciate the quiet content and the beauty of an English village,
will be induced by this book to feel no little sympathy for those whose
lives are cast among the dreary islands and deserted bays of Labrador.

  FREDERICK TREVES.




AUTHOR’S PREFACE


This book is intended to give a general account of the country and
people of Labrador, and to summarize the efforts made by the council
of the Mission to Deep Sea Fishermen, during the past three years,
to brighten the lives of the many brave toilers of the sea on that
desolate coast.

I have avoided the use of scientific terms, and have ventured to quote
from some of the few books on the subject without the permission of the
authors. Amongst these are Dr. Nansen’s _Eskimo Life_, Mr. Packard’s
_The Labrador Coast_, Dr. Harvey’s _Newfoundland, the Oldest British
Colony_, Crantz’s _Explorations in Greenland_, Hinde’s _Explorations in
Labrador_, Cartwright’s _Journals_, Rev. J. Moreton’s _Life and Work in
Newfoundland_.

The universal kindness and hospitality extended to the Mission Staff in
Labrador, Newfoundland and Canada, and the almost unlimited scope for
work, have made these three years, three of the most enjoyable in our
lives.

To his Excellency the Governor of Newfoundland Sir Terence O’Brien,
K.C.M.G., Chairman of the St. Johns Committee, among many others, our
warmest thanks are due.

The illustrations in this volume are from photographs taken on “Barnet
Plates” kindly presented to the Society by Messrs. Elliot & Fry.

  WILFRED T. GRENFELL.

 _March, 1893._




CONTENTS


                                        PAGE

    CHAPTER I.

    THE COUNTRY                           1


    CHAPTER II.

    NATURAL FEATURES                     10


    CHAPTER III.

    OF THE BIRDS AND LARGER FISHES       17


    CHAPTER IV.

    OF THE FUR-BEARING ANIMALS           28


    CHAPTER V.

    WE GO TO LABRADOR AND START WORK     40


    CHAPTER VI.

    DO PEOPLE LIVE IN LABRADOR?          50


    CHAPTER VII.

    JUST HOW FISH ARE CAUGHT             66


    CHAPTER VIII.

    THE TRUCK SYSTEM                     76


    CHAPTER IX.

    RESULTS OF THE FIRST VISIT           85


    CHAPTER X.

    OUR SECOND SEASON                   102


    CHAPTER XI.

    OUR VOYAGE CONTINUED                114


    CHAPTER XII.

    CONCLUSION OF SECOND VOYAGE         131


    CHAPTER XIII.

    ON DOGS AND DIFFICULTIES            143


    CHAPTER XIV.

    ON SEALS AND SEALERS                157


    CHAPTER XV.

    ON THE ESQUIMAUX                    174


    CHAPTER XVI.

    THE DEEDS OF HEROES                 194


    CHAPTER XVII.

    WE APPEAL FOR CANADIAN SYMPATHY     202


    APPENDICES.

    _A._ SOME MEDICAL STATISTICS        213

    _B._ SPIRITUAL AGENCIES IN LABRADOR 218

    _C._ TESTIMONIES TO THE WORK        221

    _D._ POVERTY OF THE PEOPLE          235

    _E._ THE FISHING SCHOONERS          238




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                PAGE

  S.S. _PRINCESS MAY_ _Frontispiece_

  ENTRANCE TO ST. JOHNS HARBOUR                   5

  A SHOAL OF CAPLIN JUMPING OUT ON TO THE BEACH  10

  ICEBERG IN AUGUST OFF TUB HARBOUR              17

  MY FIRST CARIBOU AND GUIDE                     21

  ESKIMO BOYS                                    28

  A BEAVER                                       33

  THE ALBERT IN BATEAUX HARBOUR                  45

  HUDSON BAY COMPANY’S POST AT RIGOLETTE         50

  FIELDS OF FISH DRYING IN THE HARBOUR           53

  BOAT RETURNING FROM THE TRAP                   66

  SNUG HARBOUR                                   69

  CARTWRIGHT STAFF                               76

  A VISIT FROM ESKIMO                            85

  MORAVIAN STATION, HOPEDALE 89

  THE _PRINCESS MAY_ IN HAMILTON INLET          102

  INTERIOR OF MALE WARD, INDIAN HARBOUR         105

  A NEWFOUNDLANDER’S HUT, LABRADOR              114

  INTERIOR OF INDIAN HARBOUR HOSPITAL           117

  THE S.S. _PRINCESS MAY_ IN MERCHANTMAN HARBOUR 131

  AN ESKIMO FAMILY, HOPEDALE                    137

  TEAM OF DOGS IN HARNESS                       143

  ESKIMO FAMILY                                 151

  THE S.S. _SIR DONALD_                         157

  ESKIMO ON AN ISLAND NEAR OKKAK                165

  ESKIMO IN REINDEER TENT, OKKAK                174

  TAKEN FROM AN ESKIMO GRAVE AT LONG ISLAND     181

  ESKIMO BRASS BAND                             205




VIKINGS OF TO-DAY




CHAPTER I

_THE COUNTRY_

[Illustration]


It is said that a recent trial, over a dispute about the fishery of
a small natural harbour in Labrador, called Tub Harbour, had reached
its third day, when his lordship, leaning over the desk, whispered to
counsel, “Where is Labrador”? Not to be caught, however, the counsel
whispered back, “In Tub Harbour, my lord.” Geography, it seems, is a
sadly neglected science.

Such being the case, I have ventured to describe the general features
of the country in the terse, accurate, graphic, and authoritative
words of the _Encyclopædia Britannica_.

“Labrador, properly so called,” says the _Encyclopædia_, “is the
peninsular portion of North America, bounded by the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, the North Atlantic, Hudson Straits, Hudson Bay, and vaguely
defined towards the S.W. by Rupert’s River, Mistassini River, and
Bersiamits River. Its greatest length is 1,100 miles, its greatest
breadth 700 miles. The area is approximately 420,000 square miles, that
is, as large as the British Isles, France, and Austria. The coast from
Blanc Sablon, a spot 85 miles up the Straits of Belle Isle, to Cape
Chidley at the entrance to Hudson Bay straits, and all the off-lying
islands, with the country inland about 70 miles, are under the
government of Newfoundland. The rest is part of the province of Quebec,
under Canadian rule.”

Sterile and forbidding it lies among fogs and icebergs, famous only
besides for dogs and cod. “God made this country last,” says an old
navigator. “He had no other view in end than to throw together here the
refuse of His materials as of no use to mankind.”

“As a permanent abode of civilized man,” says the _Encyclopædia
Britannica_, “Labrador is, on the whole, one of the most uninviting
spots on the face of the earth. A vast tableland occupies much of the
interior. This plateau, says Professor Hind, is pre-eminently sterile,
and where the country is not burned, caribou moss covers the rocks,
with stunted spruce, birch, and aspens in the hollows and deep ravines.
The whole is strewed with an infinite number of boulders often three
and four deep. Language fails to paint the awful desolation of the
tableland of the Labrador peninsula. The Atlantic coast is the edge of
a vast solitude of rocky hills, split and blasted by frosts, and beaten
by waves. Headlands, grim and naked, tower over the waters—often
fantastic and picturesque in shape—while miles and miles of rocky
precipices or tame monotonous slopes alternate with stony valleys,
winding away among the blue hills of the interior.”

The cliffs rise from the ocean to a height of from 500 to 1,000 feet.
The watershed of the interior plateau is on an average 150 miles from
the coast, and rises considerably over 5,000 feet. Near Cape Chidley
the hills are close to the sea, rising to the height of 6,000 feet,
and the view from the sea is magnificent. A powerful current coming
from Hudson Bay, combined with the great rise and fall of tide, renders
navigation here very dangerous. A high, bare peak of syenite, inland
from Cape Harrison, and known as Mount Misery, is visible seventy-five
miles.

We are accustomed to think of Columbus as discovering America, but it
seems certain that about the year 1000, while Northman and Saxon were
struggling for pre-eminence in this England of ours, bold Vikings from
Iceland visited Labrador. In the Sagas of Erik the Red and of Thorfinn
Karlsefne, we read of a strange land they visited and called Vinland[1]
or Wineland, which most probably was Labrador.

[Footnote 1: See Hon. L. G. Power’s paper on “Vinland,” read before the
Nova Scotia Historical Society in 1887.]

Now, it is needless to say grapes do not abound in Labrador, and we
southerners should not describe it now as the “Land of Wine.” But
we must remember that Erik came from Iceland, and was also possibly
addicted to the proverbial fault of travellers. Moreover, when Erik
returned from one of his voyages he called the land he had visited
“Greenland,” not with reference to its nature, because Biarni, a
contemporary voyager, describes it as a land of “mountains and high
ice hills,” but “he called it Greenland because, quoth he, people
will be attracted thither if the land has a good name.” An amusing
incident, which I quote from Mr. Power’s paper, arose out of this. When
Thorfinn Karlsefne and Snorri were making an endeavour to colonize the
“Vinland” they most inappropriately ran short of provisions. Now it
so happened they had with them Thorhall, the hunter. “He was a large
man and strong, black and like a giant, silent and foul-mouthed in his
speech, and always egged on Erik to the worst; he was a bad Christian;
he was well acquainted with uninhabited parts. Thorhall now suddenly
disappeared. They had previously made prayers to God for food, but
it did not come so quick as they thought their necessities required.
They searched after Thorhall three days, and found him on the top
of a rock; there he lay, and looked up in the sky and gaped with both
nose and mouth, and murmured something. They asked him why he had gone
there. He said it was no business of theirs. They bade him come home
with them, and he did so. Soon after, came there a whale, and they
went thither and cut it up, and no one knew what sort of whale it
was; and when the cook dressed it, they ate it, and all became ill in
consequence. Then said Thorhall: “The red bearded was more helpful than
your Christ; this have I got now for my verses that I sung to Thor, my
protector. Seldom has he deserted me. But when they came to know this
they cast the whole whale into the sea, and resigned their case to God.
Then the weather improved, and it was possible to row out fishing, and
they were not then in want of food, for wild beasts were caught on the
land, and fish in the sea, and eggs collected on the island.” Now, when
Thorhall bore water to the ship, and drank, then sang he this song:—

    “People told me when I came
      Hither, all would be so fine;
    The good Wineland, known to fame,
      Rich in fruits and choicest wine;
    Now the water pail they send
      To the fountain I must bend,
    Nor from out this land divine
      Have I quaffed _one drop_ of wine.”

[Illustration: Entrance to St. Johns Harbour.]

And when they were ready, and hoisted sail, then chanted Thorhall—


    “Let our trusty band
    Haste to Fatherland;
    Let our vessel brave
    Plough the angry wave;
    While those few who love
    Wineland, here may rove,
    Or, with idle toil
    Fetid whales may boil,
    Here on Furderstrand
    Far from Fatherland.”

So that Vinland, in the year 1000, to which this voyage had been made
because “the people of Brattahliel began to talk much about it,”
saying, “a voyage thither ought to be particularly profitable by
reason of the fertility of the soil,” appears to have turned out no
better than we found Labrador in 1891. The famous log-books of George
Cartwright,[2] written about 1790, give a more reliable account of
the country, and he appears at first to have found it profitable to
make voyages thither. The animals, and not the vegetables, engaged his
attention, and he would have made a remunerative business of it had
not first pirates and then privateers despoiled him of his ships, and
outfits, and wares.

[Footnote 2: _Journals of George Cartwright._]

In Labrador now, work as he may, one man cannot keep the wolf from the
door—the Eskimo and natives of the coast, the mountaineer and hunter
Indians of the interior, and the white settlers, are alike often face
to face with starvation. The two former are rapidly dying out, while
among the latter it is only where a settler has grown-up sons to work
with him, and a good supply of stock in boats, nets, traps and guns to
help him, that he can make anything approaching to what we in England
should consider a respectable living. Even with these helps, and with
steady, hard work, and with sound health, he seldom can hope to lay up
store against times of misfortune. True in England the poor often see
hard times, and have to face occasionally poverty and hunger. Moreover,
as Richard Whitbourne, that plucky British sea-dog, says,[3] “It hath
beene in some winters so hard frozen, aboue London bridge near the
court, that the tenderest faire ladies and gentlewomen that are in any
part of the world, who have beheld it, and great numbers of people,
have there sported on the ice many dayes, and have felt it colder
there, than men doe here, that live in Newfoundland.” Yet we must take
into consideration that here absolute want is the exception, there the
rule.

[Footnote 3: Richard Whitbourne.]




CHAPTER II

_NATURAL FEATURES_


Labrador rocks are of the oldest formation (Laurentian gneiss), and
destitute of remains of animal or plant life; so that they, too,
maintain the general harmony of desolation. On the south shore, lower
Silurian sandstones, red syenite, and one splendid mass of basalt,
known as the “Devil’s Table,” crop out.

[Illustration: A shoal of caplin jumping out on to the beach.]

The action of ice and fire are shown in marvellous manners on this
weird coast. Not only is every rock, mountain, and pinnacle crowned
with countless boulders, which seem but to need a shake to set myriads
tumbling down every incline, but the whole coast is carved and
chiselled in a wondrous manner by a glacial period that lasted much
longer than in Europe; while the fierce frost of winter has blasted
mighty rocks, and left, wherever a resting-place could be found, huge
fragments, jagged and rough, “hurled aloft, as they appear, by the
hands of Titans.”[4]

[Footnote 4: Packard’s _The Labrador Coast_.]

That long before the ice period volcanic fires helped to mould the
hills, is well shown by the out-crop here and again of trap rocks.
Especially near the hospital at Indian Harbour is this the case, where
the light and polished quartzite rocks are capped with black trap rocks
which have overflowed them. These rocks are marked with deep half-moon
shaped cuts, running east and west—done by ice—and “showing that
Hamilton Inlet, which at the mouth is forty miles wide, was once filled
with an enormous glacier.”[5]

[Footnote 5: _Ibid._]

Near Hopedale a beautiful blue and bronze iridescent felspar is found.
It is called labradorite,[6] and when polished glistens in the sunlight
like a peacock’s feather. It is used for brooches, and occasionally
for ornamenting buildings. We dropped anchor one night near an island
almost entirely composed of this.

[Footnote 6: _Ibid._, gives fuller information.]

Copper pyrites, mica, asbestos, with salts of some of the rarer metals,
such as yttrium and rubidium, have been found on the coast. One mining
company works for labradorite during the summer.

In the inlets and along the rivers some trees and arctic plants are
found. These are more especially spruces, larches, mosses, and lichens.
Birches, aspen, silver fir, willow, cherry, and mountain ash, however,
exist in favourable spots. I have seen good 60 ft. spars from the
end of Sandwich Bay. The trees get more and more dwarfed as one goes
north, and beyond the 59th parallel the merest scrub exists. The
botanical aspect, however, which chiefly interests the settlers, is
the number of edible berries, which form a valuable addition to their
articles of diet. These are bakeapples or cloudberries, cranberries,
whortleberries, bilberries, tea-berries, gooseberries, raspberries,
and currants. They are preserved in water, or in molasses when it is
obtainable, against the winter.

Very few vegetables can be grown, though with care, up the inlets a
few potatoes, cabbages, and turnip tops have been raised. The Moravian
missionaries have to cover their vegetables up at night to keep them
warm. This lack of vegetables is tritely expressed in the diary of a
gentleman wintering on the north coast; the entry describing his diet
runs as follows—

  —— ditto.
  —— ditto.
  —— ditto.
  —— ditto.
  —— found a blade of grass. Eat the whole of it.

Cartwright (1786) adds a list of his own of indigenous vegetable
delicacies—

  1. Young osier leaves.
  2. Red dock leaves.
  3. Scurvy grass.
  4. Alexander, or wild celery.
  5. Indian salad.
  6. Alpine plant.
  7. Fathen.

There is a charming catholicity about this old sea-dog and trapper.

The tips of the young spruce branches are used for making a
non-intoxicating beer, being boiled with molasses. When other tea gives
out, the leaves of _uva ursi_ are used. These are known as Labrador
tea.[7]

[Footnote 7: _Ledum latifolium_ is also called Labrador tea.]

The Saga of Lief Erikson thus describes a conversation between the
Viking and his old henchman Tyrker, who, for two or three days, had
wandered from the party: “Why wert thou so late, my fosterer, and
separated from the party?” “I have not been much further off, but still
I have something new to tell of: I found grapes and vines.” “But is
that true, my fosterer?” quoth Lief. “Surely is it true,” replied he;
“for I was bred up where there is no want of either vines or grapes.”
They said that next day they _filled their long boat_ with grapes. But
we must, I fear, consider this a “traveller’s licence,” as we must also
when old Richard Whitbourne describes the wild berries of Newfoundland.
“There the summer naturally produceth out of the fruitful woombe of
the earthe, without the labour of man’s hand, great plenty of greene
pease and fitches faire, round, full and wholesome ... great store
of hay also.... Then have you here strauberries red and white, and
as faire rasberries and gooseberries as there be in England; as also
multitudes of bilberries, which are called by some whortes, and many
other delicate berries, which I cannot name, in great abundance.

  Peares,
  Sowre cherries,
  Filberds,

of which divers times eating their fill, I never heard of any man whose
health was thereby any way impaired.”

The rivers contain salmon for about one month in the summer. These
seem, however, to be very susceptible to cold, and are seldom taken
north of Hopedale. In seasons when the drift ice remains long on the
coast the number of salmon caught is always largely diminished. They
seldom take a fly. On the other hand the trout are very voracious, very
large and numerous, and will rise at any bait.[8] They remain all the
year, and are easily caught in winter by cutting a hole in the ice and
letting down a hook with a bit of raw meat. The women largely replenish
their larder in this way. Cod are far and away the most important of
all Labrador products at present—they are called “fish,” and even in
legal terms are the only denizens of the sea recognised as “fish.” In
summer they come into shallow water, first in pursuit of a small fish
known as “caplin,” and then remain probably to spawn before seeking the
deeper water in winter. It is unlikely that in their migrations they
cross any large portion of the Atlantic.

[Footnote 8: There is a large salmon-trout fishery at Ungava.]

The caplin come to the shallow water in countless myriads to spawn.
They are somewhat like a sardine, only a little larger. At times they
blacken the water, and so crowd one another as they swim along the
very edge of the water in calm weather that every ripple of the sea
leaves numbers struggling on the strand, till at times the whole beach
is hidden by dead and dying fish. Further north these caplin visit the
shore later in the year. They are followed always by immense numbers of
cod. I have seen cod also so thick that even in deep water there seemed
no room for them, their backs being constantly out of water. This is
called the “caplin school,” and on the catch of cod during their visit
the success of a whole fishery will depend.

While the “caplin school” lasts the most intense excitement exists. The
men will work day and night, with scarcely an hour in twenty-four for
sleep, even eating their meals in their boats. The cod at this time
will not take bait, and are caught in traps in the way described in a
subsequent chapter, or are hauled in a huge seine, by which a “school”
is surrounded. Alas, sometimes so many icebergs are driven inshore,
that the precious time slips by without any opportunity of fishing,
though all the men, with boats and gear, are waiting on shore in the
greatest anxiety to be “up and at the fish.” The caplin are sometimes
smoked and kept for food, but usually are dried on the rocks for dog
food in winter. Messrs. Munn, of Harbour Grace, have tinned them like
sardines, and they are then excellent eating. The sea also affords
“hair” seals; these are caught in nets in the fall of the year, or are
shot swimming in the bays in summer time. Whales are common on the
coast, but the people now have no means of taking them. I saw two small
right-whales which had been washed up on the beach, and also one very
large sperm whale. Fourteen hundred gallons of oil was taken from his
head. So long ago as the 15th century, before the discovery of America,
Basque whalers are said to have fished these waters. In the far north,
at Ungava, the Hudson’s Bay people make a regular attempt to intercept
the large schools of porpoises. At times they will get as many as 150,
some individuals weighing a ton each. They are used for their skin
and fat, and their flesh for dog food. This is put raw into old flour
barrels, and then buried in the ground, usually in June, and in October
it will be dug up again. Decomposition will have made the flesh swell
up, and the barrels will have burst. As, however, the whole is now
frozen, the wood can be removed, and the barrel-shaped masses of frozen
and unsavoury flesh are stored away for the dogs’ repasts.




CHAPTER III

_OF THE BIRDS AND LARGER FISHES_


[Illustration: Iceberg in August off Tub Harbour.]

Herrings were once in great numbers on the coast, and were so much
larger and fatter than our English herring, that at times knaves have
found it worth while to imitate the “Labrador Herring” brand. Of late
years they have failed almost entirely to visit the coast, and fishery
stations have had to be abandoned where once the sea was “dry with fat
herring.” As many as 4,000 barrels have been surrounded with the seine
at one shoot of the net. The only other common fish is the sculpin,
pig-fish, or grubby. He is a voracious scavenger, and, in foul
companionship with his friend the flounder, may be seen sweltering on
the rotting heaps of offal which surround every Labrador fish-stage. He
appears to have no feelings, but one all-absorbing idea—“to swallow”
with his stupendous mouth. I have caught on the sharp-pronged jigger,
when fishing for “tom-cod” for breakfast, the same sculpin three times
in succession, until for self-protection it was necessary to club him
with a rowing pin.

The sleeper shark also infests the coast, and in hundreds gather to
devour the dead bodies of the baby seals left by the sealers in the
spring. It has a callous nature, and Scoresby tells us, on one occasion
while one was feeding on a dead whale, and scooping out at each bite
pieces as large as a man’s head, a sailor pierced it through with a
scythe knife. It took little notice, however, and went on feeding in
exactly the same spot. Mackerel appear in the straits of Belle Isle
only.

Two series of submarine banks lie off the Labrador shores, over which
it is shallow enough to fish with small boats and hand lines. These
have been estimated to cover an area of over 7,000 square miles. Over
these the northern current spreads countless animalculæ, in the form
of a vast ocean of living slime. This food attracts the bait fishes
especially, and they, in turn, attract the cod. No doubt also, this is
the attraction to the numerous whales, whose loud “blowing,” as they
laze along in the sunshine or hunt fish for their livelihood, alone
breaks at times the death-like silence in the lonely bays and inlets.
A large sperm whale, 70 feet long, was towed into Battle Harbour our
first year. This variety has large teeth, which are used by ivory
cutters. A Captain Clarke, writing in 1766, narrates how a sperm whale
charged one of his boats; it struck the bow with such violence that
it threw his son, who was harpooning, some feet into the air. The
whale turned and caught him in her devouring jaws as he came down. He
was heard to scream, and part of his body was seen hanging out of its
mouth, when it “sounded.” A small but beautiful whale, “as white as a
sheet,” is common on the coast. I have seen it caught in cod-traps.
Its skin makes excellent leather. The hump-back whale, and more rarely
the right-whale are also to be seen. The ferocious “thresher” whale
also visits us. It has terrible teeth, and one variety has also a huge
back-fin, six feet high, with which the fishermen say they have seen it
beating its prey to death.[9] Captain Scammon tells us of an attack by
three threshers on a huge cow-whale and her baby in a bay. “Like wolves
they flew at her throat, dragging her under water, the others charging
at her and leaping right over her. At last they killed the baby, and
when it sank kept diving down and coming up with large pieces of its
flesh. Meanwhile, the poor mother made her escape, leaving a long
track of blood behind her.” I have fired from my boat at the grampus,
but without success. Mr. Mackenzie, of the Hudson Bay Company, however,
told me he was once standing up in his small boat, waiting for a seal,
when he saw a grampus rising to the surface alongside. As its head
emerged from the water, he fired straight at the blow-hole, with the
result that the single explosive ball penetrated the animal’s brain,
and he rolled over dead without a struggle. Not an unfortunate issue as
far as the small boat was concerned.

[Footnote 9: Goode’s _United States Fisheries_.]

Pliny speaks of a whale 960 feet long! Another traveller’s license
I fear. A hundred feet is, as far as I know, an outside limit. The
whale-bone hangs from the roof of the mouth, is short in front and
behind, and is at best some six feet long. It is scythe-shaped, and
edged with long coarse fibres, which sweep over the huge soft tongue,
filtering off the slime on which these whales live. Three hundred and
fifty pieces are found on each side.

The narwhale, with his long tusk, eight feet long, with which he pokes
up the sea grass on which he feeds, was once common on this coast. Some
say he uses the tusk to bore holes through the ice, and so get air to
breathe. The tusk is really an incisor tooth, or two incisor teeth
enormously prolonged, and twisted round one another. Where no wood is
found the Eskimo hang their tents on these ivory rafters.

[Illustration: My first Caribou, and Guide.]

The sword-fish is a doubtful visitor, though he is taken off Greenland
and on the American coast. Many are the authentic accounts of ships
he has attacked and even sunk.[10] He will weigh as much as 600 lbs.,
and Professor Owen says, “he strikes with the accumulated force of
fifteen double-handed hammers, and its velocity is equal to that of
swivel shot.” In 1864 one, for which a sailor was angling, stove a hole
through the bottom of the ship _Dreadnought_, and so “the insurance
company had to pay £600 because an ill-tempered fish objected to be
hooked, and took revenge by running full tilt against copper sheathing
and wood planking.” Also in 1864 Captain Atwood took from the stomach
of a large shark a full-sized sword-fish, but the shark’s skin was
pierced with a dozen holes, showing how much the dainty morsel had
objected to being swallowed. Hanging with the armour of Christopher
Columbus at Siena, in Spain, is a sword of this fish, said to be “taken
from a _warrior_ they slew on nearing America.”

[Footnote 10: Goode’s _United States Fisheries_.]

The fowl of the air are a most important factor in Labrador life. Among
many land birds that do occur, far the most important are the willow
grouse and the spruce partridge. The former are large birds, tawny red
in summer, and white as driven snow in winter.[11] At that season many
depend on these birds to keep them from starvation, and even when a
settler’s ammunition has all run out, he can sometimes noose them with
string on the end of a long stick as they roost in the trees, so tame
are they. Like Alexander Selkirk’s animals—

[Footnote 11: The willow grouse very rarely take to the trees, the
spruce partridge almost always.]

  “They are so unacquainted with man
  Their tameness is shocking to me.”

A covey in a tree can be killed right out, if shot from the bottom
upwards, so that the falling bird does not disturb the rest. A common
entry of Cartwright’s[12] is, “Saw a covey of six grouse. Knocked off
all their heads with my rifle.”[13]

[Footnote 12: Cartwright’s _Journals_.]

[Footnote 13: To economize powder, the settlers frequently shoot these
birds with bows and arrows. The arrows are club-headed.]

The willow grouse in heavy weather bury themselves in the snow, only
the cock bird, who acts as sentry, keeping his head above ground
to watch for an enemy. Besides these “spruce” grouse, thrushes,
American robins, warblers, redpoles, snow buntings, sparrows, larks,
woodpeckers, crows, hawks, and owls occur. The snowy owl is an
exquisite white in winter, brown in summer, and a large bird. The jay,
also, is very common, filling the woods with its cries. Now and again
the beautiful gyrfalcon is seen, whilst the osprey, or sea eagle, also
breeds on the coast. All these birds are American varieties, and differ
slightly from our British species.

There is a great wealth of sea-birds, and until the last two years
the arctic curlew ranked first among these. I fear in Labrador we
class all our animals in a descending order, with the flesh-pot as
the basis. These curlew came north, in flocks which nearly darkened
the air, in September, feeding on the numerous berries, and returned
south in October. The last three years they have almost disappeared.
The settlers say that, owing to their depredations on the American
cornfields, poisoned wheat was laid out for them, and this led to their
wholesale destruction. Their annual visit can be ill spared indeed.

Perhaps one should mention next the Canada goose. Great numbers
of these breed near the great lakes or ponds. They are largely
graminivorous, and therefore do not combine the flavours of fish and
flesh, which we find so unpleasant in the gulls and divers. It is
usual, however, to catch these when young, and confine them in bounds,
for in this way not only is the flesh rendered much sweeter to the
palate, but since they grow very tame, they are used as decoys for
other geese. One man last year anchored out by one leg his tame decoy
goose, and so shot no less than thirty other geese. But, in his anxiety
for more, unwittingly left his pet too long in the water, with the
result that it died of cold; and so the goose with the golden—or in
this case “feathered”—eggs was lost. It shows these birds do feel the
cold. It is not waste to shoot a hundred geese the same day, for it is
only necessary to hang them up in rows outside the house on nails, and
they will remain frozen and fresh all winter.

Both eider ducks and the king eiders abound on the coast. In huge
flocks early in November they come to the south’ard, generally with
a north-east wind, and then in quick succession flock after flock,
taking almost all exactly the same line. Near Battle hospital is a
barren, rocky point known as “Gunning” Point. Here, under the above
circumstances, you can always find some half-dozen “Livyeres,” with
long guns and dogs, waiting for the flocks. It is difficult to say
whether the dogs or the guns are most remarkable. I measured one gun,
six feet two inches long, and when it was discharged it was always an
open question which end of it would do most damage, for the adventurous
hunter always loaded it “ten fingers” deep. When a flock pass, all
the guns are discharged simultaneously, and the ducks, which at times
respond in showers, are nominally divided equally.

But now comes the excitement. As a rule a huge Atlantic surf, with
these north-east winds, breaks over the point, and the splendid pluck
and endurance of the dogs is taxed to the uttermost. Dashing into the
waves, I have seen them repeatedly hurled back, bruised and winded,
high on to the ledges of rock, only to be dragged off by the return
wave and once more pounded on to the rocks. To avoid this, the brave
beasts hold on with the energy of despair, and many times have I noted
their bleeding paws, and nails torn off in the unequal struggle. Yet
they would at once return to the charge, and, waiting their chance,
leap right over the breaking crest, and so get clear of the surf. Once
they have seized a duck they never let it go, and I have often felt
sorely tempted even to jump in and give the brave creatures a hand,
when it seemed impossible for them to keep up the struggle any longer.
Yet, after being lost to view, engulfed by a huge breaker, one would
see soon a duck appear, and after it a dog’s head, still true to its
hazardous duty. Sometimes, however, they are really lost.

Petrels, loons, divers, gulls, guillemots, widgeon, teal, scoters,
puffins, shanks, sandpipers and other waders abound. These are shot in
the fall, and salted down for future consumption. Their eggs are also
collected for eating; and though we found even the eggs of the domestic
hen, when allowed to feed on fish remains, too highly flavoured to be
appetizing, yet I have seen healthy babies flourishing on gulls’ eggs.
Whitbourne, writing in 1612, speaks of the utility of the penguin—the
great auk was common then. He says, “These penguins are bigge as geese,
and flye not, for they haue but a short wing, and they multiply so
infinitely upon a certain flat Iland, that men drive them from thence
upon a boord into their boats by hundreds at a time; as if God had
made the innocency of so poore a creature to become such an admirable
instrument for the sustentation of man.” Then, as now, he says the
“fishermen doe bait their hookes with the flesh,” and also that they
were so fat that the men drew threads through under the skin and used
them as candles.




CHAPTER IV

_OF THE FUR-BEARING ANIMALS_


[Illustration: Eskimo Boys.]

For food purposes among land animals the caribou, which closely
resembles the reindeer, ranks first. These roam over the interior in
great quantities, feeding on the very plentiful Iceland moss. In winter
they scrape away the snow with their large cow-like hoofs to get at
it. In Newfoundland they are very plentiful in the interior, and Mr.
W. Tyrrell of Winnipeg told me, that on the west side of Hudson Bay
he found thousands, so tame they would eat out of his hands. They
migrate north in summer, and south in winter, due, says Rae, to their
“sense of polarity,” but I should presume in search of food. They are
difficult to find in the woods, for the colour of their skins varies
with the seasons, and always closely resembles their surroundings.
Unfortunately they are too far inland for the majority of settlers to
reach.

The stags have magnificent antlers, which are especially fine about
October, the rutting season. With these they fight fiercely, going down
on their knees, and striking with the powerful brow-antlers. I have
seen several pairs of “locked horns” that have been picked up, the poor
creatures having got these fixed and died side by side of starvation.

A hunter this fall, having skinned a young stag he had killed, put the
skin over him so that the horns, which were attached, came on his head.
He then walked out towards a herd of does, over which a fine stag was
keeping zealous watch as they grazed on the open marsh. They allowed
him to come within range, and then the stag, mistaking him for a rival,
actually charged down upon him.

Polar bears are not uncommon, and five were killed this season near
Cape Chidley. Captain Blandford, of the S.S. _Neptune_, told me that,
having sent some men ashore for water in a strange harbour near Cape
Chidley, they returned in great haste, calling for their guns, and
shouting, “Bears!” They were soon perceived from the ship to be firing,
shot after shot being heard in rapid succession, and great expectations
were raised of bear steak for dinner. At last the hunters returned
with downcast countenances. The bears proved to be only inflated heads,
which some Eskimo were using as buoys for their lines.

In one boat going out to their fish trap were seven men, six rowing,
and the skipper standing on the stern seat, steering with an oar.

Suddenly a large white bear was sighted swimming close to the boat.
There was no gun on board, and yet the men were loath to lose so rich a
prize. Chase was therefore given, and the skipper kept hurling at the
bear the large two-pronged lead “jigger,” with a stout line attached.
Each time he threw it the bear warded it off, striking it a smart blow
with his fore-paw. At last one jigger came fast, and then another, till
the bear, who seemed only bent on escape, and was now wearied with
repeated diving, was hauled near the boat, and first clubbed with an
oar, and then despatched with an axe.

Black bears are very common. They are, as a rule, herbivorous, eating
the wild berries, and insectivorous; but one night a settler I was
staying with showed me the skin of a large bear he had just trapped.
He was living at the mouth of a trout and salmon river, the entrance
to which he barred with nets. Two bears happening to observe some fish
struggling in the net on the surface of the water near the land were,
I suppose, tempted to feloniously sample the unexpected windfall, and
having once erred, continued their wild career. For the settler told
me they learnt regularly to come down and haul his nets, dragging them
to the land, and not only eating out the fish, but severely damaging
the nets. But punishment had been meted out to one in the form of a
charge of buckshot, to the other by a steel trap.

Cartwright thus illustrates the power of this bear: “We discovered
this morning the damage done by a polar bear to a cask of oil. It was
of strong oak staves, well secured by thick, broad hoops of birch. Yet
with one blow of his tremendous paw he had snapped off the four chime
hoops and broken the staves short off.”

The most valuable fur animals are the fox, otter, beaver, mink,
marten, and lynx. Musk-rats, squirrel, and hares are also plentiful.
The porcupine is not uncommon. One specimen I shot was larger than
a sucking pig. The long black hair, which almost obscures the short
quills, made it resemble a bear as it sat asleep on a bough at the top
of a fir tree. A bullet through the head brought it down at once, but
even when mortally wounded they will cling to the boughs, and you may
have to fell the tree. I saw a dog one day worrying one. The porcupine,
with its head well down, waited for the dog to come near, and then
switched round his tail end, on which are most spikes, with lightning
speed, hoping to leave some in his enemy’s nose. The quills are all
barbed, so that they “work in.” In this way they will kill dogs,
wolves, and foxes. A fox was found dead near Hopedale, its skin ruined
by festering sores, which, on examination, showed the ends of the black
and white quills. It is very amusing to see how easily it wards off an
enemy by always turning its back to him! When the dog was tired out,
the porcupine went up the nearest tree, had a good meal, and went to
sleep on a bough.

Black or “silver” fox skins are very valuable. For one good black skin
I have known £170 given by a Russian nobleman. The average retail
value of silver fox skins is nearly £50. Now the cunning of foxes is
proverbial, but Cartwright tells us a story of vulpine ingenuity in a
marten. One day he was going to travel a long distance, and desired
to leave a deposit of food for his return journey. He feared to bury
it, because foxes would be sure to find it, so climbing a tree he hung
it by a string from one of the branches. Shortly after a marten came
along, and espied the dainty morsel high over his head. Whether he had
watched old Cartwright climbing, or whether it was an inspiration, the
tale does not say, but in any case it climbed the tree also, gnawed
through the string, and then, with an appetite whetted by the exercise,
had a square meal at its leisure.

[Illustration: A Beaver.]

Walking one day through thick wood we came across a regular “pathway,”
the trees having been felled to make travelling easy. A glance at the
stumps showed that it was a road cut by beavers, to enable them to drag
their boughs of birch along more easily. The pathway led to a large
house on the edge of a lake, and, fortunately for us, the beaver was at
home. There were other houses on an island in the lake, and below them
all a large, strong dam, some thirty yards long, built the shape of a
half-moon, and below this two more complete dams across the river that
flowed out. The dams were made of large tree-trunks, with quantities
of lesser boughs, and were many feet thick, and very difficult to
break down. The houses were built half on land, half in the water. The
sitting-room is upstairs on the bank, and so is the “crew’s” bedroom,
and the front door made at least three feet below the surface to
prevent being “frozen out” in winter, or, worse still, “frozen in.”

The whole house was neatly rounded off, and so plastered with mud as to
be warm and weather-proof. This is done by means of their trowel-like
tails, which are also of great use in swimming. The house was so strong
that even with an axe we could not get in without very considerable
delay. In the deep pond they had dammed up, we found a quantity of
birch poles pegged out. The bark of these forms their winter food, and
is called “browse.” The beaver cuts off enough for dinner, and takes
it into his house. Sitting up, he takes the stem in his fore paws,
and rolls it round and round against his chisel-shaped incisor teeth,
swallowing the long ribands of bark thus stripped off. While entering
the house the stick often sets off a trap set for them. The trappers
say they do this purposely. When surprised they retreat to holes in the
bank, of which the entrances are hidden under water. These are called
“hovels.”

Beavers always work up wind when felling trees, and cut them on the
water side, so that they fall into the pond if possible, and the
wind helps to blow them home. This beaver we caught proved to be a
hermit—at least he was living alone. He may have been a widower of
unusual constancy. They do not destroy fish, their food in summer being
preferably the stem of the water-lilies. Otters occasionally kill and
eat beavers. When they call the beaver has to try and be “not at home.”
Of the other animals I have not space to say much. The blue-grey hare
is a large animal, and like all the others turns white in winter—so
wonderfully does God remember all His creatures.

The pretty little squirrel is very tame. Like a good sensible fellow
he makes round holes in the ground, and hides enough berries for his
“winter diet.”

The climate of Labrador is rigorous in the extreme, in spite of
the fact that in summer, especially in the inlets, the thermometer
sometimes registers 75° and even 80° F. Icefields from Baffin’s
Bay and Davis Strait block the coast from October to June, the sea
freezing entirely over all along the shore. Over this all the winter
travelling is done, but sometimes the commotion below so moves the
ice up and down that a team of dogs with their sledge will only move
backwards when a swell arises. The average temperature all the year
round is at Hopedale 27° F., at Nain 22·5° F., that is a mean average
temperature of 5° and 9·5° respectively of frost. During the months
the sea is open, countless islands of ice are driven all along the
coast, while snowslips often make the land dangerous. A settler, his
two sons, and son-in-law were ascending the slope of an island near
Sandwich Bay to witness the first break-up of the ice in spring, when
an avalanche of snow buried all but one son, who was a few yards behind
the rest. Rushing to where he saw his father last, and tearing away
the hard-frozen snow with hand and foot, he came eventually on his
father’s head, four feet below the surface. Though his father heard the
son searching, he could neither stir nor shout to guide him, from the
weight of snow over him. This man told me the sad story. The other two
lads were lost.

Storms of exceptional violence and of sudden onset occasionally visit
the coast. The wind seems to blow from all quarters at once, hurling
clouds of sea-water as dust, often mixed with icy spicules, far over
the land. A few years ago a vessel in Black Tickle, lying at anchor
near Gready, was carried up and left on the rocks twenty feet above
high-water line; at the same time £4,000 of damage was done, in that
one harbour alone, by all the stages with the summer’s voyage of fish
and all the boats being suddenly washed away. It was then October, and
snow was on the ground. All the survivors left as soon as possible. On
returning next year an old man of this vessel was found dead beneath
the snow, his hands crossed, his eyes bandaged. Evidently he had laid
himself out for burial. On October 9, 1867, in one of these sudden
gales, forty vessels were hurled on the rocks. Forty poor souls lost
their lives, and fifteen hundred people were cast ashore.

Again on October 26, 1885, in a similar hurricane 80 vessels were lost,
70 lives, and 2,000 men, women, and children left on the coast. The
Newfoundland Government had to send up special steamers to bring these
people home.

Easterly gales especially, as the water is deep, heave in a most
wonderful ground-swell. Close to the land, I have in our little steamer
been so low down in these great watery valleys, that, standing on deck,
we could not see even the tops of the hills over the crest of the next
wave. Admiral Bayfield says, “It bursts with fury right over islands
thirty feet in height, sending sheets of foam and spray, sparkling in
the sunbeams fifty feet up the sides of precipices.”

One feature, however, of rare beauty is peculiar to these Arctic
regions. I mean the Aurora Borealis. At times one radiant crown circles
the zenith; at others, vast columns of light advancing across the
heavens keep changing shape like battalions of men attacking, the
varying uniforms of these flying squadrons resplendent with every
shade of violet, red and gold; at others deadly pale phantoms creep
ghost-like upwards from the northern horizon, till the whole space
overhead is filled with quivering rays. Icebergs, till now invisible,
reveal their baneful presence; but almost before the sailor has time to
note their bearings, these transient glories are suddenly extinguished,
and the sea and sky are once more plunged into darkness, all the more
death-like for the contrast, so that men call it, “The dead at play.”
The weird mirage also serves to add mystery to these regions. Often
have we seen huge icebergs as if capsized, and hovering in the waves
of ether over the stern realities below, as though kissing them and
rejoicing in their power for evil.




[Illustration: Mountaineer Indians on the _Sir Donald_.]




CHAPTER V

_WE GO TO LABRADOR AND START WORK_


ON June 15, 1892, the good ship _Albert_, 97 tons register, and 151
displacement, was towed out of Great Yarmouth Harbour, and amidst many
farewells from wharves, quays and piers, spread her canvas for her
first transatlantic voyage. Trimmer ship never left port bound on such
a journey. Stout timbers, teakwood decks, iron hatches, new running
gear—nothing had been forgotten—and in light airs of summer or whole
gales in winter, I want no snugger vessel. The four voyages made by her
at present, under the care of Captain Trezise and his crew of eight
men, certainly deserve notice here.

1892. Bound out. From Fastnet Rock to St. Johns, Nineteen days.

Bound home. From St. Johns to Start Lighthouse. Twelve days.

1893. Bound out. From Fastnet Rock to St. Johns. Seventeen days.

Bound home. From St. Johns to Great Yarmouth. Twelve and a half days.

Our best twenty-four hours’ work was 240 miles, registered on two
harpoon logs. The fact that we registered under 100 tons, allowed us
to carry an uncertificated mate—Skipper Joe White, so well known
in the North Sea. It also made my certificate as a competent master
of some practical use. After visiting the mission vessel _Edward
Birkbeck_, at work among Manx and Irish fishermen off the south-west
coast of Ireland, we followed the course taken by Cabot in his caravel,
the _Matthew_, nearly 400 years ago, and made a landfall directly
opposite St. Johns Harbour. Here a scene of the wildest confusion
greeted us. The prosperous city we expected to see had been almost
blotted out by fire; and still amidst the ruins of churches, public
buildings and private dwellings, smoke and flames arose in all parts
of the city exultant and unsubdued, looking at night-time like glutted
vultures over their helpless prey. Warehouses, wharves, and even
vessels at anchor, had shared the same fate, so that landing at all
was a difficult matter at first. In the streets, here and there, were
disconsolate groups of men, excavating from tons of fallen masonry,
safes which had proved none too safe, and which, lying burnt,
battered, and discarded at intervals, served to enhance the sense of
general desolation.

From the harbour the first appearance suggested the ruins of Pompeii,
for the wooden houses of 12,000 people had gone up in smoke, leaving
only rows of blackened and scorched pillars rising from the charred
debris. On closer inspection, however, the illusion was dispelled, for
the pillars proved to be tottering brick chimneys, with two or three
half-destroyed fire-grates above one another, the whole being topped
by most prosaic cracked chimney-pots. Queer things had happened in
the general panic. Patients who had lain in bed for years “arose and
walked.” Barrels of dry goods were rolled pell-mell into the harbour,
whence they were subsequently fished out. Merchants gave general leave
to bystanders to save what they liked from their shops. Church pews
were packed with heterogeneous goods and chattels, which only served
to add to the conflagration when the sanctuary itself fell a victim to
the all-devouring flames. Title deeds, recent enactments of parliament,
ledgers, valuable manuscripts, were destroyed in scores; while, as
the fire occurred just before tea-time, thousands found themselves
houseless, hungry, dusty and “smoke-dried” by morning. To meet these
sudden needs every available building was thrown open for shelter,
while weak tea and light refreshments were served out, in every variety
of pot, kettle, and cauldron available, by cabinet ministers from the
steps of the Government buildings. The respected premier was to have
been seen at an early hour of the morning with a background of blazing
houses, in a most precarious position astride an angular roof, putting
out burning embers as they fell. Nor did the flames cry “Quarter” to
the episcopal apron, even his lordship escaping coatless. It was said
that a jeweller, who had at the last moment sent his assistant to put
valuables in the safe, found on opening it afterward a dust brush and
an old matchbox only. One man was noticed skurrying up the hill with a
feather mattress on his back, all unconscious it was brightly burning;
while one, like another Nero over another Rome, was seen playing a
piano in the open street, that had been hastily deposited there by its
flying owner. The musical tastes of the community were impressively
brought out by the fact that some dozen “borrowed” pianos were rescued
from houses in neighbouring villages, when authority was once more able
to cope with disorder.

Forest fires continued to rage in every direction for days and weeks
after, till the greater part of the peninsula of Avalon was treeless,
many country homesteads sharing the same fate as the city. In some
planter cottages I visited, I found men who had been fighting for their
lives, homes, and possessions for days with these forest fires. In some
cases the women, children, and goods had been carried out and deposited
for safety for two or three days on the edges of the great “ponds,” as
the huge lakes all over the country are called.

Most wise enactments on the part of the authorities prevented what
might have led to serious riots. All public-houses and liquor shops
were promptly closed, and several attempts at incendiarism were nipped
in the bud. Yet, amidst all their own troubles, the Newfoundlanders
found time to show us the greatest of kindnesses. So much so that it
would be invidious here to particularize one more than another. While
in St. Johns we visited every ship in harbour, giving away “readin’,”
and finding out all we could about the fishermen and fisheries. The
Hospital Mission ship, with her cargo of warm clothing, some of which
was at once in demand, her medicines, and her stores of healthy
literature, spoke practically of warm hearts in the old country,
still dear to all her distant children, and served to prove to this,
her oldest colony, that England is still a mother in more than name.
Hundreds of all classes and denominations poured down to see the
_Albert_ when once her mission was understood, for it took time to
realize that the lovely ship, with such admirable equipment, was
really free for the poor and sick of bleak Labrador. A pilot having
been provided for us in the person of Captain Nicholas Fitzgerald, the
_Albert_ sailed for Labrador.

[Illustration: The _Albert_ in Bateaux Harbour.—Flags up for Service.]

Dense fog prevailed for four days, so that the end even of our own
bowsprit was scarcely visible, the _Albert_ standing accordingly well
out to sea, “Brother Foghorn” having it all his own way. On the
fourth day we caught a glimpse of Cape Bauld, the north-east corner
of Newfoundland, and then the impenetrable veil dropped again. Our
only occupation had been our deep sea thermometer, which registered
generally from 28-30° Fahren. in two to three hundred fathoms. On
Sunday we once more sighted land. The foe had gone, and was replaced
by a bright clear day—not a cloud in the sky, not a ripple on the
dark blue water. Innumerable rocky islands and lofty headlands were
visible away on the port bow—some showing a bright yellow from the
mosses and lichens on them. Around us we could count thirty magnificent
icebergs—chips from the eternal Arctic ice. A school of whales were
sporting under our lee, every now and again throwing jets of glistening
water high into the air. The scene to our eager eyes was one indeed of
surpassing interest and beauty.

Our pilot’s experience was at once on trial, for only a very imperfect
survey exists of the coast. And not one single landmark, lightship,
buoy, or distinguishing mark exists to aid the mariner anywhere along
this dreary coast, a lack not remedied by the luxuriance of fogs and
icebergs. It stood the test well. He pronounced the spot “Roundhill
Island.”

After passing through a precipitous rocky entrance, half closed by a
stranded mountain of ice, on which the long swell of the Atlantic was
thundering, we dropped anchor off a long narrow creek, round which
our glasses revealed rude fishing stages and mud huts. The name of the
harbour was Domino.

Five minutes was long enough to bring several small boats alongside,
with eager inquiries as to who this strange vessel might be! Where
was it bound? what was its errand? while a few more minutes saw us
being swiftly rowed ashore to come and see G—— who had been “bad all
summer.”

Soon I was sitting in a tiny, dark mud hut, with neither glass in the
hole that served for light and air, nor a chimney to carry up the
smoke from the fire on the floor, through the large hole in the roof
intended for its escape. A groaning man sat doubled up on a rude bench
in a dark corner of the room, while his wife endeavoured to restrain
the super-abundant energy of a crowd of children. “Been ill long?”
I asked, after the usual greetings had been exchanged. “About three
weeks. Wish I could get home. There’s no chance for a sick man up
here.” Evidently he did not yet grasp the idea of our hospital ship.
“Well, we’ll see what can be done,” and the case was inquired into, and
found to my joy to be one for which relief could, by care, be obtained.
After some further talk, in which one or two fishermen joined, who
had entered during the examination, we had a few words of prayer for
God’s blessing on the means used, and left for the ship, leaving behind
us, for the _Albert’s_ first evening in Labrador, at least one poor
heart grateful—and thoughtful. A hearty service aboard and many minor
cases of sickness closed the day. Daylight again saw boats alongside
the _Albert_, and we were called to visit a poor Eskimo dying from
consumption. He had been brought from an island four days before, and
was lying in a lonely hut, hoping some day that he would be well enough
to get aboard the mail steamer for advice.

The poor house was indeed ill-calculated for a dying
man—ill-ventilated, ill-lighted, and dirty—with little clothing, and
still less food, semi-starvation was rapidly hastening on the end. Oh,
for a clean bed, a nurse, a hospital, to put such cases in, was the
whole talk over tea that evening. All was done that could be. Food,
medicine, and some warm clothing were taken him; but ere the _Albert_
came south again, death had claimed the poor fellow for its victim, and
closed the sad scene of human suffering; and the valley of shadows had
been crossed without the knowledge of a Saviour, who takes away all its
sting. At whose door will this fault be laid? Not more than once a year
does the sound of the glad tidings of God’s grace reach Spotted Island,
the home still of some fifty persons.

To avoid repetition, I must now content myself by giving a general
description of the people of this coast and their methods of earning a
living.




[Illustration: Hudson Bay Company’s Post, Rigolette.]




CHAPTER VI

_DO PEOPLE LIVE IN LABRADOR?_


Do people live in Labrador? There is a resident white population of
some 5,000 at least, scattered along the south and east coasts. They
call themselves “Livyeres.” North of these are Eskimos, and in the
interior Indians, known locally as “Mountaineers,” but actually they
are different branches of the old Algonquin race. The last returns were
as follows:—

  White population of St. Lawrence coast 4,411
  White population of Atlantic coast     2,416
  Eskimo on the coast                    1,700
  Indians of the interior                4,000
                                        ——————
                              Total     12,527
                                        ——————

These Indians, who once held North America from the “Rockies” to the
sea, have steadily decreased in numbers. As they live by hunting only,
the extensive forest fires, and depletion of fur-bearing animals,
have driven them further and further west. Whole encampments have
been reported “found dead from starvation.” Only occasionally do they
visit the coast, bringing furs with them to trade with the Hudson Bay
Company. They never take to sea fishing.

The Eskimo, of Mongolian origin, at one time were as far south as
Newfoundland. In 1780 a tribe 500 strong still dwelt along the Straits
of Belle Isle. Now almost all are north of Hamilton inlet; of these I
shall speak later.

Whence do the whites come? Some are said to be descendants of those
who fled the old country in press-gang days. In 1780 we hear of a crew
of convicts sent out there. Some are descendants of sailors wrecked
on the coast, or of Newfoundland and other fishermen who have been
left there. More come from those who have gone out in the service of
the Hudson Bay Company, while some few have emigrated directly there.
The largest settlement consists of about 100 persons, and with the
people of neighbouring coves numbers about 350. It is here where the
mission has built the first hospital ever known in Labrador. In May or
June every year the coast is visited by from 20 to 25,000 fishermen,
women and children. These arrive as soon as the ice is blown off the
coast by westerly winds. Most are from Newfoundland, some from Canada,
with occasional Americans buying fish. They come in every variety of
vessel—small and large, good, bad and indifferent—mostly of the
schooner type. They number about 1,000. Besides the crew, which varies
from five to ten men, with one or two women, most Newfoundland vessels
bring a number of people called “freighters.” These are landed at
various harbours, where they have left mud huts and boats the previous
year, and where they will fish all summer. The fish is “made” or cured
in Labrador, and sent in large vessels to the Mediterranean, Brazilian,
or English markets. Meanwhile, the schooner has gone further north in
search of a “fare” of fish. If successful, the fish will be salted,
and brought home “wet,” so that these vessels are called “green-fish
catchers.” As they come south they call for their “freighters,” with
their goods and chattels, who pay 25 cents per head per cwt. of fish
caught in return for their passage. The overcrowding on some of these
vessels returning is very great, and is made worse by the fact that
every year more vessels go than return. Besides the cargo of fish,
casks of oil, nets, boats, and general goods, perhaps thirty, forty,
or fifty men and women will be crowded into these small vessels, at
times with only room to lie down in the hold between the deck and the
cargo. On one small schooner of nineteen tons we counted fifty people,
thirty-four men and sixteen women. The women, many of whom have
children with them, are often very bad sailors. As a rule, they are
not allowed on deck except in port, and this voyage is a nightmare all
summer to numbers. They are pillars of pluck, many of these women. They
can handle an oar and sail a small boat with the best, and among them
are “Grace Darlings” only wanting an opportunity. They work chiefly at
cleaning fish and keeping the huts for the men, though some, I think
very wrongly, form part of the crews of the green fish catchers. The
Canadian schooners are larger—carry about eighteen men and no women.
The people consider Labrador very healthy, which I attribute to their
comparative immunity there from epidemic diseases. The damp mud huts,
often filled with snow till the very day they go in, the entire absence
of any sanitary provisions, combined always with either cold draughts
or too little ventilation, have, without any doubt, an ill effect on
the people, but more especially on the women, who occupy them.

[Illustration: Fields of Fish Drying—Emily Harbour.]

The fishermen are tall men, and broad to match, born to the sea,
and are accustomed, from their training at the seal fishery on the
ice, to be quick and active. No lighthouse, no buoy, no landmark aid
navigation on the Labrador coast. The charts are old, bad, incorrect,
incomplete and unreliable, while north of Hamilton inlet, _where
nearly all the schooners go for green fish_, there is practically no
chart at all, most of the surveying having been done by the keels and
bilges of devoted fishing schooners. Streams of icebergs, floating
all the summer to the southward before the polar current, render it
always unwise to stay at sea at night. With sudden calms and baffling
winds from high perpendicular cliffs, making a harbour without a tug
is always hard enough; but here, in addition, the constant and dense
fogs make it often impossible, without any kind of guide, even to
find a harbour at all; for in places shoals and ledges run out twenty
miles to seaward. Yet for all this shameful neglect on the part of the
Newfoundland Government, the weak defence is constantly made, “Not
many lives are lost.” That I know to be due solely to the consummate
seamanship and daring perseverance of the fishermen. Among many good
vessels, many are bad, and, worse still, are provided with but bad
tackle and holding-gear. The latter is an absolute essential, with the
liability that exists to sudden hurricanes, and I believe more vessels
are lost in Labrador from this one cause than all others put together.
Moreover many, as I have already pointed out, are greatly overcrowded.
More than once we saw vessels drifting to destruction, and once, when
holding on ourselves for all we were worth, we had the pleasure of
saving a comrade by running him a coir hawser, and so holding him on
the verge of the rocks after his own tackle had given out and the crew
had received brief notice to quit through the boiling surf.

It must be remembered that Newfoundland, our oldest colony, exists
solely by its fishery; that one-third of its entire revenue is now
derived from this very Labrador fishery, that is some one-and-a-half
million dollars, and that in no other way could this harvest be reaped.
Moreover almost every man in Labrador may be called a fisherman, and
yet nothing is done for all their returns. Here is another method of
interpreting the value of the industry. It is said seventeen tons of
fish contain the nutritive value of 50 head of cattle, or 300 sheep.
Now the average yield for fifty years from the French and English
Fisheries is 2,300,000 cwt., that is 338,235 cattle, or 2,029,410 sheep.

The summer Labrador settlements are on islands or outside headlands,
and here both Newfoundlanders and “Livyeres” dwell, the latter retiring
up the bays and inlets, to be nearer wood and game, when the former
return to Newfoundland. There are about a dozen well recognised central
stations in Labrador, where agents representing the various merchants’
firms are stationed to collect the fish from the fishermen dealing with
their firm, and to ship it thence to market. These men have far better
houses than the rest, generally also a store from which the general
wants of their men are supplied. As a rule, advances are made of all
needful appliances and food to some better known fishermen.

These men are known as “Planters,” and employ under them so many men
and women on “share” or wages. Occasionally, also, the agent has some
men of his own, working for settled wages, who may be made to fish for
cod, to pack salmon, to load vessels, or do any work they are told.
When seven men fish one trap or seine net, the total catch is divided
into fourteen shares—seven for the planter and seven for the men.
That is one share each; a few dollars on the hundred quintals being
allowed the skipper of the “crew.” Or when a man fishes his own net
with four men, I saw the value divided into twelve shares—four for
the master, four for the trap, and one each for the men, so that each
man gets every twelfth fish. When hand-lining begins, and two men have
charge of each boat, every other fish belongs to the men, the owner
taking two out of four. A girl’s wages are £6 to £7 currency for the
season, and her keep. Each planter has his own hut, but his men often
live together. The huts are of logs with the chinks filled with moss
and covered with sods. Entrance is by a low doorway, and there is a
small window placed low down to prevent escape of heat. Warmth and
ventilation cannot co-exist in so small a space. A man a little over
a fathom long once visited Sir Donald Smith, when an agent on that
coast. To accommodate his legs at night a hole had to be cut in the
wall, and a box lined with dogskin fixed up outside. I saw one day a
fisherman moving house. The house was first wedged up on piles, then a
rope was put round it, and, with the help of a few neighbours, it was
dragged higher up the hill. Another house I saw had been dragged over
the harbour on the ice “to be nearer the fishing ground.” An American
stove, or more often an open fireplace (the smoke going out of a huge
chimney like in an Irishman’s cabin), serves for warmth and cooking.
The stove, anyhow, is a movable chattel, and accompanies its master to
his winter hut in the fall. Clothes are so expensive and so scanty that
every man is his own wardrobe, and he who puts his clothes in a drawer
must himself go naked. Thus a block of furniture is obviated. Bunks are
put up for the men or a partition boarded off, while the girls sleep in
a “lean-to,” called a “bunk-house,” or have a part partitioned off, or
hang an old curtain in front of their bunk in the smaller huts.

Some Newfoundland planters and agents provide boarded huts for their
“crowd,” but in all the arrangements are much the same. The Livyeres’
families have all their separate huts. Each “crew” has a fish stage,
alongside which the fish are brought in the boats. These stages
are built out on piles driven into the mud. Long poles, known as
“rounders,” are laid side by side across the tops of these, and form a
kind of flooring. The whole is then roofed in with poles and sods, in
order that fish-curing may proceed at night by costers’ lamps, or in
bad weather. Up the middle of the stage runs a table for splitting the
fish on. The green fish are hove up on to the stage with pitchforks,
seized by a woman who cuts off the head—“the header,” and passed
on to one who opens the throat—“the throater.” She passes it to a
man—“the splitter.” He, with great dexterity, cuts out the backbone
and flings the flesh into a tub of water for the “washer.” I have timed
a man split thirteen fish in one minute. It takes the tyro nearer
thirteen minutes to split one well. The offal is thrown through a hole
in the floor into the sea below, where every variety of scavenger fish
congregates. In Norway, and by Messrs. Munn of Newfoundland, the skins
and bones are made into a splendid glue, while the rest of the offal
is preserved for fish manure. The washed fish is next laid in pile
and salted. The “salter” is also a skilled mechanic. It is easy to
undersalt and easy to “saltburn,” or oversalt, whereby much valuable
salt is wasted. This salt comes all the way from Cadiz by the same
vessels that take the fish away. Next the fish is spread in the sun.
A fine day is waited for, and all hands turn to. Many a slip exists
between the cup and the lip, however. If the fish has lain too long,
it will be sodden, and go grey or dun. If the sun is too hot, it will
be sun-burnt. If rain comes, and it is wet and dry again, too often it
will be injured. It must be turned and returned. At last it is gathered
up into circular “piles,” back up, and tail to the centre. These piles
are covered over with birch rinds, and a few stones placed on the top
to keep the whole together till it is time to ship them away. They
are weighed into the ship, two quintals at a time, a “culler” looking
over them as they pass in and classifying them; and according to this
classification they are paid for. The receipt handed to the fishermen
runs thus:—

              Received from..............

  Large }
  Medium}    Merchantable fish
  Small }
  Madeira    Merchantable fish
  West India Merchantable fish
  Talqual    Merchantable fish
  Inferior   Merchantable fish
  Damp       Merchantable fish
  Dun        Merchantable fish
  Slimy      Merchantable fish
  Labrador   Merchantable fish
  And also ...... casks of ...... gallons of oil.

There is always a great race to get first to market, for the first
cargo always fetches a higher price. One fish planter ships his own
fish to England, and thus is able to get at times a better price than
that offered in St. Johns. On the other hand, he runs the risks of the
freight, insurance, etc.

No railway, public building, roads, drains, or such like things
exist in Labrador, and every man is a fisherman first, a handy man
after—boat or house-builder, blacksmith, cooper, curer, as the case
may be. Only three harbours do I know where liquor is sold: in one of
these two poor fellows were drowned through its influence last year.
No jail or police exist on the coast. A small revenue schooner, with a
justice of the peace on board, is responsible for maintaining the law
and preventing smuggling. The people are, as a rule, law-abiding; but
crimes, especially among the half-breeds and Eskimo, go unpunished.
In one settlement a lay reader and school teacher are established; in
another an aspirant to the Methodist ministry, while settlements up two
long inlets enjoy similar privileges. These men are all doing excellent
work, as is a Presbyterian student from Dalhousie University in the
Straits of Belle Isle.

Most school work can be done in winter, for in summer only those too
young to work can be spared; and if they are old enough to journey
alone to and from the school, they are old enough to do something at
the fishery. Only a small percentage of Livyeres can read or write.
Every summer it is usual for a Roman Catholic priest, a Methodist
minister, and an Anglican clergyman to visit as many stations as they
can on the first 400 miles of coast. They are passed along in boats
from place to place by the too willing people, who, irrespective of
creed, extend their kindly hospitality to all alike. In places wood
buildings have been put up voluntarily by the men in their spare time,
for Sunday services, conducted usually by one of themselves. Our own
gatherings, at times too large for the _Albert’s_ hold or these little
buildings, were held in fish stores ashore, cleared for the purpose, or
in the open air, one of the countless boulders serving for a natural
rostrum. I have seen the same place serve in the morning for Church of
England, in the afternoon for Wesleyan, in the evening for Salvation
Army, and pretty much the same congregation attending each. I have
known a Methodist meeting house on Sunday reconsecrated for Mass on
Monday. This absence of conventionality, this socialism on a basis of
kindly generosity, is most congenial to one from the old world.

Fresh meat and vegetables are alike hard to procure. No cow or horse
exists. The domestic animal world is represented only by the inevitable
dog; the vegetable by the stringy cabbage or struggling turnip, whose
leaves alone attain to economic value. To prevent scurvy in winter,
when fresh fish is not attainable, salt meat must be avoided, even
if they can afford to buy it. The following recipe is invented with
that end: “Dry the cod in the sun till it is so hard none can go
bad. In winter powder this, rub it up with fresh seal oil, and add
cranberries if you have any.” This dainty is known as “Pipsey.” These
people neither need nor expect luxuries; sugar and milk are very rarely
used—tinned milk being too expensive, molasses being cheaper than
sugar, and also margarine than butter. White rabbits, white grouse and
sea-birds help to eke out the winter’s diet.

But to be accurate, in two harbours I saw a pig, brought by the
Newfoundlanders. When they arrived the dogs were banished to a desert
island near. In one harbor we listened to much wailing. Two pigs
had been isolated on an island near, the fishermen enjoying daily
the bliss of anticipation. But alas! here the dogs proved equal to
the occasion. An on-shore wind had brought them the joyful news, and
that very morning the pigs disappeared, only a few blood-stained
bristles remaining to tell the story of the crime. In one harbour a
planter had brought a sheep, but its isolation had so developed its
affection for its owner that it followed him everywhere, and he could
not make up his mind to kill it. Goats fare a little better: they have
horns. Yet in one place three nights in succession a goat had been
missed. A team of runaway dogs was roaming near, but only approached
the houses under cover of night. All these animals are, however, the
perquisites of affluence, and belong almost entirely to the planters
from Newfoundland. Some few bring fowls, which eke out a perilous
existence on suffrance of the dogs. At the Hudson Bay Company’s station
of Rigolette, Mr. Wilson, the chief factor, told me that two of his
dogs got into his well-enclosed yard, and in four minutes killed eight
hens and tore four goats to pieces. Among all these people no resident
doctor exists, nor is skilled aid of any kind to be obtained in case
of need; for the few minutes in the summer that the mail steamer
stays in any harbour, and the irregular times of her calls, gives the
doctor on board no opportunity to render effective aid. When sickness
falls on the people no one knows what it is, or how to treat it. Not
knowing they are ill, men work on till a trifling ailment becomes a
matter of life and death. A slight accident with no “first aid” at
hand, permanently cripples a limb or destroys a valuable function,
such as sight. Bleeding unchecked from a simple wound deprives a
dependent family of the father and breadwinner. Many are the piteous
stories I have learnt of such cases since first, in 1892, the Gospel
Hospital-ship _Albert_ was sent out by warm hearts in Old England to
their brothers and sisters in this “region beyond.”

After all this description of Labrador, do you ask, as I do, why do
people stay here, when the fair farm lands of Canada are offered free
to all? There is a story that a solitary old woman in the wilds of
North America was one day visited by a gentleman from that “hub of
the universe,” Boston city. She asked him, “Where do you live?” “Oh,
hundreds of miles away—in Boston.” “How do you manage to live so far
away?” was the reply. To begin with, every one has a lingering belief
in his “ain countree.” The wild life to which these people are born has
a certain charm to others besides themselves. Sailors they are born
and bred. What else can they do? Some have been taken by the Canadian
Government to the southern side of the Gulf of St. Lawrence—the Arcady
of Longfellow—and yet have found eventually their way back. The fact
remains—here is an increasing English-speaking colony.




CHAPTER VII

_JUST HOW THE FISH ARE CAUGHT_


[Illustration: Boat returning from the Trap full of Fish.]

Cod (Gadus) = goad or rod fish—called in Norway stick or stock fish,
or in Spanish “baccalhao,” in Italian “mazza,” a club or rod—all of
which synonyms imply that a rod or stick is used in preserving the
fish. In Norway two are tied tail to tail, and then slung over a stick,
being then exposed to sun and air so many days—prescribed by law. The
Eskimo largely hang them from a rod by the gills after splitting and
salting them, but Newfoundlanders spread them out on poles, called
“flakes,” or on the natural rocks, called “bournes.” But “you must
first catch your hare, then cook him,” and seasons suitable being
very brief in these Arctic climates, the most rapid methods must be
adopted; and in cod-catching Newfoundland has eclipsed all her rivals.

In spring, nets only are used, for the fish are in shoals, feeding on
the myriads of caplin, a fish the size of a sardine, which are inshore
then to spawn. The most successful net is the cod-trap. Practically it
is a submerged parlour of net without a roof, but with a large door,
into which the cod are invited to walk by a long net leading to the
nearest headland of rock, and ending at the centre of the door. It is
all kept in position by heavy anchors. The distance from the rock is
from a hundred to a hundred and fifty yards. Cod are gregarious fish,
and, like sheep, follow a leader. When, therefore, one comes up against
the net as he swims near the rocks, he turns out into deeper water to
circumvent it, and so leads his confiding following directly into the
net. Here, being a platonic fish, he remains, indolently browsing on
the infusoria and ocean slime which collect about the twiny walls of
his prison. Suddenly a boat appears overhead, and a long telescope,
with a plain glass bottom—the fish glass—is pushed down into the
room, through which the trap-master is peering to see how many finny
prisoners there are. Now the door is pulled up, and now the floor is
rising—rising—rising, being passed along under the boat, until all
the frightened captives are huddled together in one seething mass near
the surface. Now a dipper is put in, and the jumping, struggling fish
are heaved into the boat. Soon the boat is full to the gunwale, and
still there are more prisoners. Large bags of net are produced and
filled with the rest of the fish. These, after being buoyed, are thrown
overboard to wait till they are “wanted.”

I have seen fifty to sixty hundredweight of fish taken in the same
trap time after time. Sometimes more are caught than the curers can
keep pace with. Then the fortunate trap-master allows his neighbours
to “haul the trap,” receiving in return a small proportion of cured
fish. Now certain positions are thought better than others for setting
these traps, with the result that there is every spring a race from
Newfoundland to get them, like our members of parliament race for
seats. The law does not allow traps to be set till a certain day, and
the leading net must be put out to secure the berth—a top hat on a
bench is not sufficient—and unless within four days the whole trap
is set, the claim becomes void. Thus, while the ice was still on the
shores of Labrador, a steamer was sent ahead with numbers of men, each
armed with “a trap leader,” to get ahead of the sailing schooners which
were working their perilous way along inside the floe ice. In one case,
after the best berths had thus been taken, the nets to complete the
traps did not turn up till after the prescribed four days. Meanwhile
another crew had pulled up their nets and pounced on the coveted
prizes. Again, some men were landed with “leaders” on one station late
at night. “No sail in sight. We’ll secure our berths to-morrow
morning.” During the night, however, a southerly wind brought in two
schooners, and during the hours of darkness these secured the prize
while the others slept.

[Illustration: Snug Harbour.]

The “cod-seine” ranks second in importance among nets in Labrador. It
is of prodigious size, up to 60 feet deep, requiring seven men to work
it, and is used either to bar an inlet, or to shoot round a shoal of
cod in deep water. The seine master stands, fish-glass in hand, high on
the bow of the seine skiff, as his stalwart crew, with eight huge pine
oars, drive the boat along, perhaps hour after hour. The vast net is
piled up on the stern, while one man stands on the thwarts, steering
with his oar like an Italian gondolier. Suddenly “Easy all!” is cried;
“Hold her up!” and the seine master peers down into the water with
his glass. A school of fish is on the bottom. Swiftly the net anchor
is dropped, and the net is paid out astern as the willing backs bend
to the oars and force the skiff round and home to the starting place,
marked by a gaily-painted buoy. Thus the whole school are enclosed. Now
the weighted foot rope is “gathered” together, the net has become one
vast bag, and the prisoners are dealt with as before, _i.e._ dipped out
and bagged off.

The gill net is rarely used in Labrador now. In Norway it is still a
favourite method. Twenty to twenty-four nets, eighty feet long and
about fifty feet deep, are “shot” in water of from twenty to sixty
fathoms, or even in ninety fathoms, as many as three to four thousand
cod being meshed at one time. Under certain circumstances nets are no
use, _e.g._, on the great banks, or late in the season in Labrador.
Lines must then be used, and it is advisable to use bait on the hook.
To us accustomed to row out and catch a few codling with a mussel, the
subject of “baits” has apparently little interest. But out here it has
become a subject of international importance. The fact is, mussels
are too soft, coming off the hook too readily, and also cod are a
fastidious fish, and will only condescend to swallow that “poisson”
which is in season. True, it is not essential to bait the hooks at
all. Instead you may take two large hooks, fix them back to back with
a piece of lead, which will act at once as bait and sinker. Lower this
to the bottom, and then keep jerking it up and down. Often you will
strike fish as fast as you can work, using one line in each hand. This
method, called “jigging,” eventually injures the fishery, probably
because numbers of fish escape after being wounded, and others follow
them, possibly to devour them, more than five being injured for one
caught. The fishermen say the injured warn their friends, but a fish’s
appreciation of pain is somewhat doubtful.

Sailors have told me of sharks which, after being caught and having
had their livers cut out, will continue to pursue and swallow the same
piece of pork as long as sufficient vitality remains in them to keep
pace with the vessel; nay, even that, after being cut in half, the “bow
end” will still wriggle after the bait, when the ship is becalmed in
the doldrums. But Jack is prejudiced against sharks.

Bait is necessary, however, in deep water, a fact that led the
Newfoundland Government to pass the famous “Bait Act,” rendering it
illegal to supply the French with bait in the hope of destroying their
banking industry. Alas! laws are easier to make than enforce, and the
worst sufferers were those who formerly made out of this supply an
honest livelihood.

Octopus and Squid is _facile princeps_ among baits for cod. Yet the
cod must be circumspect in indulging this weakness, and confine his
attention to those of tender years, for these cephalopods attain to
enormous size at times in these waters. Thus the Rev. Dr. Harvey
(F.R.S., Canada), of St. Johns, narrates how, while recently two
Newfoundlanders were out fishing in their little rowing boat, two
enormous arms rose out of the water, seized the boat, and endeavoured
to drag it below the surface. Fortunately a chopper lay at hand in the
boat, and the great beast, after losing two of his arms, sank amidst
volumes of black ink. The parts of arms cut off were nineteen feet
long, and are now preserved in St. Johns Museum. Shortly after another
was secured by Dr. Harvey, which had been found floating, dead. Its
grasp embraced forty feet. Again, in 1772 Cartwright caught one seven
feet long without head or tentacles. The beaks of these fish resemble
a parrot’s, and in large specimens are far more solid than human teeth.

Catching octopus is exciting work. A number of row-boats are anchored
close together outside some point of land, and the fishermen are lazily
jigging up and down a little bright red leaden weight, bristling with
wire spikes. Suddenly a stir—all are working with might and main. A
company of squids are passing and flying on the jiggers like vampires;
the red weights are being grabbed voraciously. Beware as you get him
on board. Suddenly he relaxes his grasp, and shoots out a jet of ink,
which smarts considerably in one’s eyes, and leaves weird patterns on
white linen. They swim backwards and at great pace after their prey.
Salted down, these squid fetch fifteen to fifty cents per hundred.
“Bankers” pay ten to twenty cents per hundred.

Caplin I have mentioned. They are taken in fine meshed seine nets or in
cast nets thrown from the shoulder like the “retiarius” of old threw
his.

Herrings form a very excellent bait. They are caught in gill nets
anchored out in likely spots, and these are emptied every day. Our
English drift nets are rendered impossible by the icebergs and sudden
storms, with no harbour lights in case of emergency at night, and
herring see the net in daytime. Herrings have been kept frozen, and
then found to serve as excellent bait. A new way to freeze these is to
half fill a barrel with broken ice, salt and herrings, and then roll
it well over and over. Thus a constant supply of bait at known places
might be maintained in fixed ice houses; a much needed arrangement, for
much time and money is lost by the uncertain supply of bait. Launce
or sand eels have often to be used, but can only be taken on sandy
bottoms, perhaps miles from a fishing station. Then several crews
club together, and lend men in turns to row the bait skiff as many as
twenty-four miles, sharing up the bait when it arrives. Occasionally
they pay shares for a small launch to keep up a regular supply. White
fish, a small fish taken in surface seines, are occasionally used, and
also sometimes whelks.




[Illustration: Cartwright Staff.]




CHAPTER VIII

_THE TRUCK SYSTEM_


Cod alone is fish in Labrador diction. Cod is the coin of the realm.
Money is scarcely known, and no other medium of exchange is used by the
people, whose _raison d’être_ almost is cod. All live on goods advanced
on credit, to be paid for by their catch of cod. This truck system, is
the next of kin to the old feudal system, and has long been extinct in
most civilized countries. It seems the early treatment of Newfoundland
by England is partly responsible for the rise of this baneful system,
which it is now difficult to remove. The struggling fisherman knows it
is a state of bondage, but cannot get out of it; the merchant knows its
disadvantages outweigh its profits; while the colony must recognise
that it is alone the cause of so many of its younger and more energetic
men leaving the country as soon as they can see their way to do so—for
no race loves its country with more patriotic affection than do
Newfoundlanders.

Up to the end of the eighteenth century no one was allowed to remain
in Newfoundland after the fishing season, each captain of a fishing
vessel being held responsible, under heavy penalty, to bring back all
his crew to England; while if any one did desert and remain behind to
be near the fishing grounds, and to reap the harvest of the sea for his
own benefit, his stage, and even house and goods, might be appropriated
by the first fishing captain out next year. This made it only possible
for fishermen to go out when some merchant capitalist would finance the
voyage, who, in return, repaid himself out of the fish caught.

Now many vessels were sent out, and though the catch of fish by any
individual vessel was uncertain—for fish set into one place one
year and another the next—the whole catch would generally repay the
merchant amply. But as in some cases all vessels of one merchant might
do badly, a large price was charged on goods advanced as a further
security for the merchant, that in any case he might be quite sure
to recoup himself for his outlay. And lastly, though there might be
no immediate return in fish or cash, yet the fishermen at once began
to accumulate a large nominal debt; and though possibly, and even
probably, they would never be able to liquidate this, yet the fact of
their being indebted to any particular merchant insured their fishing
for him year after year. Thus, perhaps, the best issue for the merchant
at settling time seemed in every case to be a debt by each man, but
not large enough to make the fisherman despair and so fish badly. Thus
the successful fisherman had to pay for his unsuccessful brother’s
deficits. The fishermen soon found this out, and were not only soured
against their suppliers, but lost the incentive to make any effort
to discharge their whole debts. The merchant now found it difficult
to make ends meet through bad debts, and was led to buy in the fish
himself, insisting on the fishermen not paying in cash, but fish.
Each year the commercial body fixed its own price for fish, punished
those of their men who sold the fish for cash if they could do so, and
themselves resold the fish in foreign markets, gaining a second profit
when possible. Thus large nominal debts arose, which in hundreds of
cases the men could never hope to liquidate. The spirit of pauperism
was directly fostered, the men becoming absolutely dependent on the
charity of their merchants, and in many cases from year to year never
knowing how much they really owed.

This system persists to-day, as an evil heirloom, dragging down both
merchant and fisherman. To-morrow’s labour is ever mortgaged ahead for
food to-day. At last a time comes when no longer any hope of return
from certain men can be expected. The advances are suddenly cut off,
and these men, deprived of their usual source of supply, fall back on
government relief, till to-day over one-third and nearly half of the
whole revenue of the country is spent in pauper relief. The recipients
are frequently able-bodied men, and yet they have no shame in accepting
it, looking on the government as an independent source of wealth,
and calling their annual six to twenty-four dollars “a government
appointment.”

Thus the system has played into the hands of idleness and dishonesty
also; for though all a man’s catch is nominally his merchant’s, he
is tempted to keep some part back and sell it elsewhere, that he may
have some ready money to spend when he returns. Thus one man who has
already more fish than would pay his own debt, will accept fish from
another heavily in debt, and turn it in to his merchant as his own,
handing over afterwards the money or goods he obtained in return to
his friend, and perhaps deducting a shilling a quintal for the risk
involved. A far more common way is to take and sell your fish right
away to another firm. All are generally glad to get fish anyhow; for
not only is it a loss to send away a ship without a full freight, but
also there is a great race to get vessels away first each year, as
the first in the market will realize a higher price for their cargo
throughout. To prevent this the various firms agreed at one time not
to buy fish from another merchant’s planters. But this fell through,
and now only a careful watch is kept on how much fish each man has as
the season progresses, and the amount compared with what he delivers
to his merchant. Any man caught alienating much fish would not receive
any advance in future, though most firms are anxious to get all the men
they can.

The advances are made in May or early June. When the fish has been put
on board the vessels for market in October, notes of credit are sent to
the merchants thus:—

  Received from......., .... qlts. ... qrs. ... lbs. of Labrador fish.

  To Messrs. ........., qlts. ... qrs. ... lbs. of Merchantable fish.

    Per Agent.......

Then, as soon as the total catch can be roughly estimated, the Chamber
of Commerce meet in St. Johns and decide what price they will give for
fish. The credit notes are at once cashable at that price, cargoes
being all insured. Each firm then credits its planters and men with
their catch at that price, and a balance is struck between the total
and the amount of each one’s advance in May. If a surplus remains, it
goes to provide the fisherman with his winter’s diet. Now a good catch
for a fisherman is 100 quintals of dry fish, or 300 quintals of green.
On an average 100 fish go to the quintal, that is, each man must
catch 30,000 fish. Each quintal is worth in St. Johns from 2-1/2 to 3
dollars, so that 275 dollars is a good season, less 30 dollars for salt
245 dollars, or about £50. It must be remembered many will only average
20 quintals some years, or 50 dollars, not £50. The average catch per
head for “bank” fishermen last year was 47-1/2 quintals. How often a
man will be dependent, therefore, on charity for a supply of food for
himself and his family during the winter becomes apparent.

Often the winter’s diet that can be laid in is all too small for
the needs of the family; and before the breaking up of the ice once
more allows cod-fishing to commence, and the planters to return
from Newfoundland, the poor Livyeres are reduced to living on “the
landwash.” “A short feast and a long famine” is a coast epigram.

Clothing is perhaps most difficult to find money for, and is apt to
become so scanty that the settler, for lack of proper protection from
the weather, cannot prosecute his fishing or hunting, especially where
the temperature falls to 50°, or even more, below zero. I met one
poor fellow who years before had missed his way home at night and had
had to sleep out in the open. He had lost both feet from frost-bite.
One can realize the need for woollen clothing. When near Winnipeg, in
North Manitoba, I saw a young Englishman, who had been caught out in
a blizzard, and had lost both hands and both feet at the wrists and
ankles from frost-bite. But a still more vicious circle is established
when, to procure food for this winter, a settler has to part with his
means of “killing a voyage” next summer. The following is a case in
point as related to me on the spot:—

Some three years ago, at Big Bight, a Mr. Olliver, with his wife and
five children, had fallen into great poverty. At last in spring, when
all his food was exhausted, he set out, taking his last possessions,
an old Jack plane and a trout net, with him. Having no dogs, he had
to travel afoot over the ice and snow. At last he came to the house
of the best-off settler about, Mr. Tosten Anderson, a Norwegian, and
a splendid fellow. When asked for food, Mr. Anderson, showing all the
flour he had, said, “To part with any more than I have done, means we
must all starve together.” This was thirty to forty miles from his own
home. He then went on twelve miles to a Mr. James Thomas, whose reply
was just the same. Two days later he reached Richard Blomfield’s house
on his way back. Here he met the same reply again. No more was heard
till three days later, when Blomfield was summoned to the Ollivers’
house. On the middle of the floor, his coat off and his gun by his
side, lay Mr. Olliver, shot through the head. In a heap in one corner
lay the three youngest children, scarcely dead from blows from an
axe lying near them. Apparently determined to spare those who might
provide for themselves, he had sent out first his wife and eldest
daughter to search for food, and his eldest boy to search for birds.
Mr. Blomfield told me he supposed that the cries of the hungry children
proved too much for the poor father. Truly Virginius of old acted in
much the same way.

This, of course, is an extreme case, and in order to arrive at
a fair conclusion, we took, as far as possible, a census of the
Livyeres—noting the numbers and ages of children—the proportion that
could read and write, and the number each had of gallons of molasses,
barrels of flour or pork, pounds of tea, and tobacco, which, alas,
nearly all use, however poor and unable to afford luxuries. That
a very large proportion had a quite insufficient quantity of food
became beyond question. It must be remembered it is not a question of
how much they can buy, but how much a supplier is willing to give to
people already heavily indebted to him, only a few being independent
enough to pay down for what they take. Government aid, sea birds,
seals, trout, willow grouse, and rabbits, _i.e._ arctic hares, are the
supplemental sources available. The Newfoundlanders are too often only
little better off than Labradormen, and I have many piteous accounts
of parents themselves suffering chronic starvation in order to supply
their little ones with the necessities of life. Soon, it is sincerely
to be hoped, the interior of Newfoundland will be opened up. All look
to the new railway to turn the attention of many to the cultivation of
the land, which will at least help to render existence more easy. It
is reasonable to hope also that the new sealing laws, the new fishery
restrictions, and Mr. Adolph Neilsen’s magnificent work at the fish
hatchery and lobster incubation, are the presages of happier times. But
the people can never be free, industrious, and contented, until the
truck system is dead and buried.[14]

[Footnote 14: December, 1894. And now the long impending crash has
come—both the banks of Newfoundland have failed, and ten out of twelve
merchants’ firms have had to suspend payment, while the masses of the
population are face to face with absolute starvation. The Truck System
has entailed ruin on all concerned in it, and has brought the country
to the verge of bankruptcy. There are not few, however, who see in
these terrible events the promise of better things. A better system
of trade must arise, a better relation between labour and capital, a
better era for this oldest of England’s colonies. “Whom the Lord loveth
He chasteneth.” God grant it may be so in this case.]




[Illustration: A visit from Eskimo.]




CHAPTER IX

_RESULTS OF THE FIRST VISIT_


November, 1892, saw the _Albert_ once more in St. Johns Harbour,
after having spent seventy-eight days on the coast. She had visited
many harbours, treated 900 patients, distributed much clothing and
literature, and collected much valuable information; while Mr. Adolph
Neilsen, superintendent of Newfoundland fisheries, who had joined the
_Albert_ during the greater part of her cruise, had been carrying on
scientific observations calculated to directly benefit the fishing
industry. Daily services had been held, at which thousands in all
had been present, and not a few had confessed openly aboard their
intention, by God’s help, to live new lives.

On arriving in a new harbour, our large blue flag, now known along
the whole coast as the herald of good things, had always proved
a sufficient call to prayers. We found no need for adventitious
attractions; where opportunities are so few, we found men and women
only too glad to come and join in simple praise to God for mercies
past, and prayer for the unknown future before them. Here the
uncertainty of things seen, renders things unseen more real, while
the impotence of man being so evident, makes the power of his Maker
more intensely felt, and the anxiety to be ever ready to meet Him more
deeply earnest. Even the sceptic has acknowledged it means something,
this “coming to Christ” of the fisherman. His faith, unburdened by
“higher criticisms,” or convenient interpretations, sees in his
Master’s words a call to follow Him, on earth as well as in heaven.
Often I have watched men tremble and hesitate, time after time, when
God’s Spirit seems striving with them, before the final step is taken.
For they count well the cost beforehand, and realize fully the weakness
of their own natures. But once “over the line” means _following_ Christ
to them—means coming out, being separate, marked men. The world sets
for them no higher standard than they set for themselves, and their
self-sacrificing fidelity to their ideal has stirred the heart of more
than one Christian worker. There is little half-and-half following,
little “coasting” for fear of “launching out,” such as saps to-day the
joy and rejoicing of thousands of professed Christians. A fisherman
knows if he has “tacked ship,” and is on the Lord’s side, or on the
other side. Often they say, “I should like to be”; almost never, “I
hope I am.”

For visiting places inaccessible to the ship, from the fact that they
lay among dangerous rocks, or up narrow creeks, or because they only
offered shelter to small boats, we had taken with us a twenty-five
foot whale-boat, the _Alfred_, which we rigged with two lug-sails
and a jib. In this we made many journeys. Once we capsized her; once
lost our way in the fog, and had a nasty half-hour, with wind rising,
and fearing we were making out to sea as we ran before it, till the
thunder of the surf warned us of the land, and the bottom of towering
cliffs, white with Atlantic breakers, broke suddenly into view. We
had to abandon the boat that night, and walk home over the hills; but
we managed to fetch her home, close-reefed under shelter of the back
of the islands, next day. It so happened that where we landed two
or three couples wanted marrying. No chance had offered for several
years, so one couple determined at once to return to the ship with us
for that ceremony, as we had at the time a visiting minister on board.
It was late at night before we got there, but we decided (1) any hour
was better than none, and (2) that in a lonely harbour, on a solitary
ship (and as they already had three children), “pronouncing the banns
might be dispensed with.” So we adjourned to the cabin, and proceeded
to business at once. The skipper was best man and I was witness,
while the steward and crew, who had previously decorated the cabin
with bunting, together with one or two Livyeres from the creek, were
congregation. After all was over, hard biscuits and tea were served,
in lieu of a wedding breakfast, while the occasion was honoured from
a few old fowling-pieces and by a couple of dynamite distress rockets
on the _Albert’s_ deck. Altogether, we visited in the _Alfred_ and the
_Albert_ some thirty-five harbours, exertions which so told on the
_Alfred’s_ constitution that now she is taking her last rest at Great
Yarmouth.

Our dingey also upset in Domino Run, when endeavouring to get ashore;
an accident which proved nearly fatal to the ship’s carpenter, for he
happened to come up under the sail, and was unable to swim. Happily it
only ended in an undignified rescue. A more serious accident happened
to the _Albert’s_ winch, for in Winsor Harbour, while letting go
the anchor, a catch got wrong and stripped off all the teeth of the
cog-wheels. After this we were unable to get our anchor in, except with
the help of a great many men, for it was impossible to replace the
cog-wheel on the Labrador. It was quite a sight on leaving harbours to
see often fifty men, who had come off voluntarily, “walking in” the
anchor by means of a system of pulleys, each as he came to the stern of
the ship trotting back to catch hold of the rope again near the bow,
a continuous chain of men being thus maintained, and all singing,
as they pulled, one of the old shanty songs to assist them to pull
together. The names of the harbours we entered were, if old Eskimo
names, long and unpronounceable, such as Nukasasuktok; if French, often
almost unrecognisable, thus Cape d’Espoir has become Cape Despair; if
English, often descriptive of some incident, such as Run-by-Guess,
Seldom-Come-By, Ice Tickle, Cutthroat Island, Split-Knife Harbour,
Bakeapple Bight, Tumbledown Dick Island, and so on.

[Illustration: Moravian Station, Hopedale.]

When visiting up the bays our chief enemies were always the mosquitos.
These are a very real scourge, for, like the black fly and sand fly,
which also exist in myriads, they bite very severely, and we found them
at times so thick that it was difficult to breathe without inhaling
them. Even the “Livyeres” seldom, if ever, get accustomed to them,
while it is at times impossible to send Newfoundland crews up inlets
for firewood.

Our medical cases had included many and various ailments, especially of
the eye, the lungs, and the skin. Many teeth, of course, had called for
attention; and the forceps had on more occasions than one been the way
to a man’s heart. If you do not believe this, try a week’s toothache at
sea without remedies.

Among many interesting cases was that of one poor fellow, who fourteen
days previously had accidentally shot off both his arms below the
elbows. Since that time he had lain on his back, with nothing but
an oily rag over the wounds. As we went into his hut he held up the
raw stumps piteously, from which, in each case, some inches of bare
bone protruded. What could be done was done to relieve his agony, but
the poor fellow died of exhaustion after an operation on the stumps.
The night we were leaving that harbour it was dark and blowing as I
clambered out over the rocks, to signal for the ship’s boat about
10 p.m. There I found waiting for me the poor man’s wife, who, in a
flood of tears, gratefully wrung my hands, till I too felt a choking
sensation about the throat. There was something so real in her sorrow,
now left still more lonely on that lonely coast.

One day a silver-haired old fisherman came aboard for advice. “All
my three sons died this summer from diphtheria, sir,” he told me. “I
buried them all the same week. My eldest was nineteen, and he lasted
out the fever; but he couldn’t swallow, and I did not know how to
feed him.” “What did you do?” “Well, I tied a split herring round his
throat—some say that is good—but he starved to death before my eyes.
It is hard for us now to get along, with no one to help me tend the
nets. You see I’m not so young now as I was.”

One poor woman, with a tumour of the leg, one day sent for “the mission
doctor.” She couldn’t walk for it, she said, and life had become a
burden. We told her, “An operation will make you quite well, and we can
put you to sleep while it is done.” She would not take chloroform,
however, and so we thought all was over. Next morning another message
summoned me to the cottage, where I found five strong men waiting.
“These men have promised to hold me, doctor, while you take that away.
But I may bawl, mayn’t I?” In quarter of an hour all was completed, and
my plucky patient was laughing loudest at the queer scene; for bawl
she had, indeed, “to keep me from thinking of it,” she said. But the
men held on well, and in ten days she was all healed, and was up and
walking.

Among our most interesting visits had been that to Hopedale, the most
southern station of the Moravian missionaries; but I must leave to a
later chapter a description of the Eskimo, of whom we saw a good deal.
There were three Moravians and their wives here, the oldest having
lived in Labrador twenty-seven years. Once a year they communicate with
England by the good ship _Harmony_, which, with its predecessors, has
been visiting the coast for one hundred and twenty years. These men are
true followers of the Saviour in the self-sacrificing spirit, which
draws them to live their lives out on so barren and deserted a coast.
At seven years old their children leave them for ever, to be educated
in Germany, and then find an occupation in life. In one harbour, Zoar,
was a lonely missionary and his wife, who had just sent home their
eighth and last child, a little girl of seven years. “Can you not bring
me a baby from England? we are so lonely now,” said the good man’s
wife to me. Even to get a wife they must write home, and one is chosen
by lot for them. After our visit, they wrote as follows:—

  HOPEDALE, LABRADOR,
  _September 7th_.

  _To the Council of the Mission to Deep Sea Fishermen._

 GENTLEMEN,—On behalf of the Moravian Mission here I would ask you
 to accept our warmest thanks for sending your ship, the _Albert_, to
 visit us and our people, cut off as we are for so many months in the
 year from the rest of the world. We feel by its visit that we are
 within your thoughts. For the comfort we have found in having our
 hands spiritually strengthened by the presence of other Christian
 men; for what benefit we have received from medical attendance in our
 Mission house and in our congregation; for the kind gift of books for
 our library, and for the blessing we had in joining these meetings
 kept, and for the pleasure we have had in meeting all those we met
 from the _Albert_, we beg you to accept our most hearty thanks. May
 our Lord and Saviour bless your work everywhere, as He has done it
 here among the fishermen and at our Station.

 With kind and brotherly love, we remain your brethren in Christ,

  P. M. HANSEN,
  _Moravian Missionary_.

In Hopedale Harbour we stayed many days, for hundreds of vessels kept
calling in on their way south; for winter was then approaching, and
already cod-trap boats going to their nets had had to cut through two
inches of new ice.

On our arrival in St. Johns it was thought advisable to report the
results and deductions from this experimental voyage. Accordingly his
Excellency the Governor, Sir Terence O’Brien, invited the leading
citizens acquainted with the fishery to meet at Government House. The
report showed that (1) much needless suffering, limbs and special
functions, besides life itself, were to be saved by the possibility
of obtaining skilled assistance in the first instance; the famous
sealing master, Captain Sam Blandford, who was present, stating that
while he had charge of the mail steamer plying on the coast, seventeen
unfortunate people had died aboard without possibility of proper
treatment. (2) That even that year twenty-nine persons had died at one
harbour in Labrador of diphtheria without being able to get a doctor’s
help—nay, more, no one would take their fish or visit them to trade a
winter’s supply. (3) That the doctor on the small mail steamer was so
short a time in each harbour, and the time of his arrival so uncertain,
that the people had little confidence in the few moments possible to
devote to each case, even if they were fortunate enough to see the
doctor at all, while it was impossible to undertake any serious case
with success. (4) That poverty and starvation directly result from
sickness or accident to the breadwinner being left untreated. After
the report the following proposition was moved by the Hon. A. Harvey,
and supported by Sir Wm. Whiteway, premier, and Sir Robert Thorborne,
ex-premier, which was carried unanimously:—

 “_Resolved_—That this meeting, representing the principal merchants
 and traders carrying on the fisheries, especially on the coast of
 Labrador, and others interested in the welfare of this colony, desires
 to tender its warmest thanks to the directors of the Deep Sea Mission
 for their philanthropic generosity in sending their Hospital ship
 _Albert_ to visit the fishing settlements on the Labrador coast....

 “Much of our fishing industry is carried on in regions beyond the
 ordinary reach of medical aid or of charity, and it is with the
 deepest sense of gratitude that this meeting learns of the amount of
 medical and surgical work done, besides all the other relief and help
 so liberally distributed. This meeting also desires to express the
 hope that the directors of the Mission may see their way to continuing
 the work thus begun, and should they do so they may be assured of the
 earnest co-operation of all classes of this community.”

His Excellency the Governor then nominated a committee to help to
perpetuate and extend the operations of the Mission in Labrador. One
merchant present, Mr. W. Baine Grieve, presented to the Mission a house
at Battle Harbour for the first hospital.

The _Albert_ soon after left for England. She reached Yarmouth on
December 1st, where she received a hearty reception from the many
friends of the work.

In the report of the Chamber of Commerce of Newfoundland the following
reference to the work was included:—

“A new feature worthy of mention in this report, affecting as it does,
more or less, the comfort of 20,000 or 30,000 of our people, was the
appearance on the Labrador coast of the Mission to Deep Sea Fishermen
ship _Albert_, outfitted by a philanthropic society in England,
non-sectarian in its lines, and intended to afford skilled medical
aid to, and provide to some extent for the mental and material wants
of our fishermen. This essay has been an unqualified success, and has
evoked from the recipients of its bounty expressions of deep gratitude,
while at the same time it has engendered in the breasts of all who
are interested in the welfare and prosperity of the Colony feelings
that must strengthen the bonds which bind this comparatively neglected
dependency to the Mother Country. The vivid portraiture, by the doctor
in charge, of his own personal experiences on the coast is likely to
result in well-organized co-operation by the Colony next season upon
the lines on which the Mission ship is being worked.”

And in February, 1893, the following resolution was received from the
St. Johns Committee:—

 “That this representative Committee will undertake to provide two
 suitable buildings which may be used as hospitals by the Mission to
 Deep Sea Fishermen, should the Council of the Mission signify their
 intention to continue their operations on the coast of Labrador, and
 the Committee will heartily co-operate in any other way that the
 Council of the Society may suggest.

 “That a copy of the foregoing resolution be forwarded to Dr. Grenfell
 for the information of the Society.

  “(Signed) {T. O’BRIEN, Governor, _Chairman_.
            {M. MONROE, _Secretary_.”

The council of the Mission replied that they were prepared to fit out a
second expedition, and to undertake the working of the two hospitals.

During the rest of February, March, and April the captain of the
_Albert_ and myself held meetings in various towns, in the endeavour
to raise money to carry on the work. Meanwhile we sent out directions
for the fitting up of the house given by Mr. Baine Grieve at Battle
Harbour, and also plans for a wooden hospital, to be built in sections
in St. Johns, for transference to Indian Harbour, at the entrance to
Eskimo Bay, one hundred and eighty miles further north.

In April an earnest appeal was made for money to obtain a steam launch,
to assist the _Albert_, by visiting otherwise inaccessible places,
and by towing her in and out of narrow harbours. At the same time
preparations were being pushed ahead at Yarmouth. The _Albert_ was once
more recalled from her work in the North Sea. She was victualled for
six months, refitted as far as necessary, and stored with the clothing,
woollens, and literature which had been in the process of collection
all winter. A crew was shipped, and by the 1st of May she was all ready
to sail. Our whaler had been knocked to pieces last year, and we had to
get a new boat to replace it, or trust still to the money coming in for
a steam launch.

Arrangements had been made for the _Albert_ to visit one or two English
seaports on her journey out, in order to solicit further help, amongst
others Exeter, Swansea, and Bristol, whence she was to sail direct to
St. Johns. Still the money had not come in. While, however, we were at
Bristol, our boat still unbought, the joyful news reached us, “Money
necessary for a launch has now come in.” The _Albert_ touched last of
all at Swansea, where a suitable rowing boat, the _Mary Grenfell_, was
presented to her. In Chester we found the most suitable launch for the
money we had—an oak-built, copper-fastened boat, with simple 9-inch
engine, six years of age, though only little work had been done in her.
She was forty-five feet long. Her great defect was her width, which
was only eight feet, so that, being carvel-built, she would roll most
dreadfully. However, while the _Albert_ sailed across to Queenstown we
fitted out the launch at a total cost of £325, and arranged to ship
it direct by Allan line steamer _Corean_ to St. Johns. On June 1st I
joined the _Albert_ at Queenstown, and next morning we set sail for
Newfoundland.

The hospital committee had meanwhile appointed A. O. Bobardt, M.B.,
M.R.C.S., of Melbourne, Australia, and King’s Hospital, and Eliot
Curwen, M.B., B.A., of Cambridge and the London Hospital, as medical
missionaries for the two hospitals. These sailed with us in the
_Albert_. They had also appointed Miss Cecilia Williams and Miss Ada
Carwardine to act as matrons and nurses under the doctors, and had
arranged for them to sail by the same steamer as the launch. We had
three dirty days on the way out, and once were at close quarters with a
large iceberg, but the _Albert_ again quitted herself well, and on our
arrival in St. Johns we again experienced the greatest of kindness. Our
committee had collected some fifteen hundred dollars. A meeting was at
once called, and a small executive of two members were appointed for
each hospital, the Hon. M. Monroe acting for Battle Harbour and Mr. W.
C. Job for Indian Harbour.

On the arrival of the launch she was at once put into order for
starting, while the nurses joined the _Albert_, as the best way to
reach their respective stations. Meanwhile the Indian Harbour hospital
was sent on by steamer to Labrador. But a pleasing function yet
remained to be done—the christening of the new launch. A telegram had
reached us that the Princess May, who had long been interested in the
Mission to Deep Sea Fishermen, had consented to allow it to be named
after her. Accordingly on May 6th, amidst much rejoicing and display
of bunting, Her Excellency Lady O’Brien christened our launch the
_Princess May_.




[Illustration: The _Princess May_ in Hamilton Inlet.]




CHAPTER X

_OUR SECOND SEASON_


On Friday, July 7th, with a steward, an engineer, and Dr. Bobardt as my
companion, the _Princess May_ left St. Johns for Labrador, the _Albert_
having left the previous day. It was not without some feelings of
misdoubt that we first encountered the swell of the Atlantic, knowing
we should not make harbour till night; and as we had two large bays
to cross, none of us being familiar with the coast, we had hoped for
a clear day to enable us to keep the land in sight; but here again we
were disappointed, for the rebound from the cliffs forced us to stand
out half a mile to sea, and a dense fog shut everything from view.
Not having yet given the launch a trial ourselves, and she being six
years of age, we were not surprised after the first five miles, when
the engineer sang out, “Sprung a leak, sir; shall we put back?” An
examination revealed the fact that we could stop the leak with a wood
plug; and so to disappoint some few “croakers,” who had “told us so,”
we settled to stand on. Our compass having only a card disc, and not
being filled with spirit to steady it, proved very unsteady, our narrow
width, of only eight feet, making us roll very rapidly. We adopted the
method of endeavouring to steer midway between the extreme points the
needle swung to, and then to keep one point inside our course so that
we should not run out to sea. Very shortly this resulted in bringing
us up straight before a perpendicular cliff. Evidently our compass was
incorrect. An examination revealed that its box had been screwed on
to the cabin with large iron screws, the proper binnacle having been
broken on the voyage out, and being still at the optician’s in St.
Johns. These we soon extracted, and making a fresh start to the nor’ard
sighted Bacalhao Island, about forty miles from St. Johns, at mid-day.

Not having sighted any more land by 5 p.m., we began to think it was
time to turn inshore, and after some time found ourselves suddenly
amidst numbers of ragged rocks and small islands. Our chart book
described on the north side of Trinity Bay some “Ragged Islands”; and
we guessed we had struck among these, so once more we stood out into
the fog. Shortly a weird noise attracted our attention. We stopped and
listened. Yes, it was a fog-horn. This confirmed our recent diagnosis
of “Ragged Islands,” and once more we knew where we were. Night saw
us safely berthed in Catalina Harbour, where we managed to coal ship
before going to rest. With no small feelings of satisfaction we went
below that night. True the locker was hard to lie on, but the anxiety
and subsequent success of that first day was a sure soporific, combined
with the fact that the previous night had been none too restful, for
we had then no confidence in the powers of the _Princess May_. Here we
found our compass was still incorrect, so we unshipped it altogether
and carried it forward, to be further from the magnetic influence of
certain iron handles. Right gaily we left harbour next morning, but
outside found a new experience. The wind had veered round and was
blowing on shore, with a chilling drizzly rain to enhance the effect of
the nasty lop of the sea. Our loose deck gear began to go overboard,
and among it our boat-hook took leave of us. Being heavy at one end it
disappeared from sight at once. It was gaily painted black and white,
and we were sorry to lose it, being our only one. As I looked back it
suddenly rose again, lifting its painted handle high out of water, as
if to ask for help. We couldn’t well desert it after that, and so went
round to pick it up. Our log has no record of the number of circles
we completed; but if the reader has ever pursued a stick with one
heavy end in a choppy sea, he will find it usually disappears just
as the vessel has completed the tedious manœuvres necessary to come
up to it. The next question was, should we venture further? The mail
steamer was just coming out behind us, and it wouldn’t look well to
give up. We would try for Cape Bonavista. By ten o’clock the Cape was
safely rounded, and the wind increasing we determined to lay into the
Bay, which is twenty-eight miles across. We should not have reached
Greenspond, north of the bay, that night, had we steamed the course we
intended; but after some hours steaming and seeing no land, we spied a
fishing boat, and went alongside for information as to our locality.
We found we were already across the bay to our great surprise and joy.
It appeared that Dr. Bobardt, who had steered all day, had headed two
points to the westward of his course.

[Illustration: Interior of Male Ward, Indian Harbour.]

We were loath to steam on Sunday, but our next run round Cape Freels
was a most difficult one, from the numberless off-lying rocks and
shoals. So when three a.m. showed a clear horizon and a calm sea, we
started off. Alas, fog fell on us shortly, and left us threading our
way through the labyrinth. Now and again we could see bottom, and at
times some rock near the surface, over which at intervals the swell
would break with a noise like thunder. The _Princess May_ did well
this day—covering eighty miles—and the mail steamer, which had only
just reached and was anchored for the night in Toulinguet Harbour,
was surprised to see us come in and tie up alongside. The fourth day
saw us on the French shore, as we rounded Cape John at mid-day. Here,
however, we met a strong head wind, against which we had no alternative
but to steam. Now, to provide some kind of cabin, a little house had
been built into the fore-part of the launch, with a square glass front,
being inside just about the size and shape of the ordinary ’bus. As we
steamed into the head sea, it was just up to this part of the cabin,
which projected a couple of feet above deck, that the launch dived,
with the result that a sort of water spout was thrown up and then
dropped on deck. Yet, as everything was closed up, no water got below,
and we managed to make a harbour to the north side of the headland. The
water, however, got everywhere but below, and we were glad of a change
after dropping anchor.

At almost all the places we called at along the French shore, we
found the people very poor and but little educated. Unfortunately
in Newfoundland the Sectarian School system prevails, with a most
disastrous result among these poor and scattered communities. In all
we found some who were anxious to avail themselves of the visit of a
doctor. In many no qualified medical man ever goes; and on the part
known to us, that is the east coast, there are none at all resident. In
the lonely harbour we were now in, called Pacquet, a man soon emerged
from the woods and came off to us in a boat. He was ill-clad and looked
equally ill-fed, and his boy, who was with him, was suffering from a
pustular disease of the skin, for which we prescribed. Though it was
warm where we were anchored the inlet was still partially choked by two
large icebergs, and our friend told us that want of a net, and indeed
any proper fishing gear, as yet prevented their getting any fish. The
mosquitos were here very numerous and very busy. It was impossible
almost to go ashore even for fresh water from the river at the head
of the inlet, and indeed when the dingey came back, a cloud of these
bloodthirsty pests followed her to the launch, and invited themselves
to spend the night in our already sufficiently crowded cabin. Professor
Hind narrates an Indian tradition that mosquitos were created for the
benefit of a saint, who, for disobedience, had been banished from
heaven to a desert part of the earth. In her solitude she prayed for
even flies as companions, whereupon mosquitos and black flies were
created. This gave her plenty of employment till it was time for her
to return, but the flies remained in order to teach men the folly of
trying to divert their attention from the consequences of their sins
by seeking amusement. Captain Whitbourne says they are of great use to
make the idle work.

We were early astir next morning, and took a course for the St. Barbe
Islands. But a breeze rising towards the land, we made a detour in
order to cross White Bay, which is eighteen miles at its narrowest
point, and so lay across till we were seven or eight miles only from
land. Then we again headed north, and by nine o’clock, with a good
breeze behind us, crossed Hare Bay and ran into St. Anthony Harbour.
During the day a curious mirage had for some time kept us under the
impression that we were hedged in by floe ice. We could see the
vertical edge, the gleaming white top, and what appeared to be even
cracks, fissures, and hummocks. It turned out to be only an optical
illusion, and we found that it kept retreating before us all the
afternoon like a will-of-the-wisp. At St. Anthony we were among friends
of last year, so were soon ashore, and the day closed with a hearty
service in the kitchen of the largest house.

The breeze increasing, delayed us a day in this port, but before
daylight on the 13th we left for an attempt to cross the Straits
of Belle Isle. As we rounded Cape Bauld a most magnificent crimson
light lit up the whole horizon. Against it stood out many stately
icebergs, rising weird and ghostly from the deep purple of the sea.
One of immense height looked just like some gigantic cathedral, its
gabled roof in the red glow shining like burnished gold, while ever
and anon the stillness preceding dawn was broken by the deep boom of
the Atlantic swell reverberating from some hollow chasm at its base,
suggesting a mighty organ played in its vast recesses. No sooner had
we passed it in silence than the engineer touched me on the arm and
pointed back at its lordly summit. “Look, sir! isn’t that some one on
the berg?” And there, sure enough, plain and sharp against the sky, on
the crest, stood the figure of a man. But our glasses soon dispelled
the illusion. It was but a pinnacle with a thin base, which, when thus
seen edgeways, so closely resembled a human figure.

From here we headed for the Sacred Islands, and a breeze making up the
straits, we ran in behind Cape Onion to see what sort of a day it was
going to be, before we ventured to cross the straits. I was surprised,
on landing, at the quantity and variety of wild flowers here.
There were represented among many others, saxifrages, umbellifers,
composites, ranunculi, primulas, and gentians. The insectivorous
“Drosera” is common on the heights, and the beautiful “Linnæus
borealis” nestles in among the scrub.

The country, viewed from the head, is very peculiar, being, as far as
the eye could range, one immense flat plain, with quite as much water
as dry land, from the innumerable winding ponds or lakes of fresh water.

By mid-day we ventured to make a start, and headed direct for Cape
Charles, close inside the island of Belle Isle. As we brought the
hills and steep cliffs of Labrador into view, we found there was still
much snow in the gulfs and crevices; while it was necessary carefully
to thread our way among the numbers of icebergs, which up to this
very week had been blocking the straits. By sundown we sighted the
flag-staff on Battle Island, and at 7.30 were once more alongside the
_Albert_. A crowded gathering below decks closed the day, all being
full of joy and hope at the prospect of another season’s work.

Next day the house given by Mr. Baine Grieve was inspected, and we
found that Mr. Hall, the agent for the fishery, had already placed it
almost in a condition for occupation. The _Albert’s_ crew also had
been at work—carpentering, painting, and landing heavy goods, such as
bedsteads, bedding, food, drugs, and furniture.

Meanwhile, the hospital for Indian Harbour, at the mouth of Hamilton
inlet, had been sent north, ready cut in sections in the coastal
steamer, _Winsor Lake_. Two carpenters had also been sent north to
work at its erection. Next day, therefore, our party divided again,
the _Albert_ going north to help with the second hospital, having on
board Dr. Curwen and Sister Williams, while I, in the _Princess May_,
went south along the straits of Belle Isle, Dr. Bobart and Sister
Carwardine remaining at Battle. This arrangement was rendered possible
by the agent extending his generous hospitality to the nurse and doctor
indefinitely.

Our first run took us to Red Bay, where we at once were among friends
of last year. Alas, poverty and want had laid their hands heavily on
this place, and some families had been nearly naked and next door to
starving all winter. Not only had 1892 been a poor fishery, but now
the best chance for 1893, viz. the caplin school of cod, had come and
gone, while densely packed ice, held in by persistent easterly winds,
had prevented the men getting their nets out.




[Illustration: A Newfoundlander’s Hut, Labrador.]




CHAPTER XI

_OUR VOYAGE CONTINUED_


On our arrival in a harbour our method was, as last year, to hoist
our blue flag to announce our arrival, to then visit any seriously
sick I could hear of, after which we had evening service in a shed,
stage, or house, and then, last of all, any could come for advice or
assistance. To every family or vessel a good bundle of reading was
given if they wished it, all the literature being selected at home as
healthy and suitable for fishermen. If any wanted God’s Word, that,
too, was to be had for asking for it; while a register was kept of
all the poor, describing as accurately as we could the nature of the
needs and deserts of each case, in order that when, at the end of the
year, we divided up the warm clothing we had brought out, it should
fall into the hands of the most deserving. In this way also we became
possessed of a valuable record for future reference. Thus in one house
when visiting a case, I found my patient to be the mother of a large
family. The poor thing, who, with self-sacrificing courage, had refused
to believe herself ill till she could get about no more, was lying on
one single wood form in a bare and dirty room, her head close to an old
cracked stove, behind which a crowd of shivering urchins were huddled
together. The sickness was acute bronchitis and pleurisy, made worse by
little clothing and less food. A haggard man meanwhile was pacing up
and down, nursing a screaming and hungry baby. I pulled the children
out from behind the stove for inspection; but their rags so failed to
cover them, that each hastened back at once after the ordeal to the
seclusion and warmth behind the old stove. The complete attire of one
bony little mite was an old trouser leg, into which he was packed like
a sack. All were alike barefooted.

Staying here over Sunday, I was the guest of a Labrador fisherman,
rather better off than the majority, an erect, grey-haired man of
about forty-five, standing some six feet two inches. His cottage,
built with his own hands, was a pattern of neatness and cleanliness,
but the bad seasons were compelling even him to desert the harbour,
and try squatting farther along the coast. He was still the fortunate
possessor, however, of a cod-trap (value about £80), by means of which
he still hoped to end the year out of debt. He was the class leader for
the neighbourhood, and had many years been standing on the Lord’s side,
and, indeed, after the Wesleyan Missionary for the Straits, he was the
backbone of the religious life of the place. Such an one, where every
detail of one’s life is known, must indeed be an “Epistle read of all
men,” of which fact he was well aware, as also, that his neighbours,
while unable or undesirous to read God’s word for themselves, measured
the claims of God on their own life very largely by his actions. This
we found to obtain more or less along the whole coast, especially among
these scattered communities, where little or no provision is made for
their spiritual needs. When therefore Sunday morning broke, and a
large iceberg was noticed drifting towards his cod-trap, threatening
to deprive him of his means of earning his daily bread, he at first
decided to go and spend the day working to save his net. But soon he
came back, saying, “I’ve decided not to go, doctor; there are those in
this harbour that only want a pretext for working on the Lord’s Day,
and I’ll not be the one to give it them.” As we climbed the hill to the
little wooden chapel I noticed him standing and greeting the people as
they came along, according to his custom, as if forgetful of the fact
that the mass of ice was at that moment probably robbing him of his
all. We had three _such_ services that day; the Wesleyan missionary,
the Rev. John Sidey, was present, and more than one of our hearts
were full at the evidence of the reality of God’s Spirit among this
out-of-the-way, isolated people. Long before sunrise on Monday, indeed
immediately after midnight, my good host was away in his boat after the
wreck of his cod-trap, and by breakfast had returned, his face radiant
with the same happy smile he always has, saying, “I _knew_ it would be
all right, doctor. The worst of the ice passed outside it; a few hours’
work, and we shall get it all right again.”

[Illustration: Interior of Indian Harbour Hospital.]

In the Straits of Belle Isle we visited all the stations to Old Ford
Island, about 100 miles from the entrance. At L’Anse au Loup, Blanc
Sablon (the boundary between Canada and Newfoundland), and at Bonne
Esperance, we found large stations for fishing, with numbers of men
hard at work at the caplin school. We had quite a number of surgical
and medical cases, including two of true (sailor’s) scurvy from want
of proper food. At one place we were called to operate on the back
of a French settler, at another on the arm of a poor Newfoundland
schooner-man. In this last case I had the assistance of a Roman
Catholic priest who was journeying along the coast.

While visiting in Forteau Bay we passed close to the wreck of H.M.S.
_Lily_. We found here that a Beaver line steamer, the S.S. _Lake
Nepigon_, had recently run ashore. While journeying down the straits
she had struck on a whale-back iceberg, and was sinking head foremost,
like the _Victoria_, when her captain succeeded in grounding her
on one of the few bits of sand for miles. Her screw and rudder were
practically out of water when she took the bottom, with her bows in 27
feet. The doctor aboard had spent three days on shore near, and had
operated on one cancer of the lip and on an old compound dislocation
of the wrist in a young girl. These came to us to have the stitches
removed.

While returning from visiting a patient at Greenly Island in thick
fog, we were unfortunate enough to run the _Princess May_ ashore. It
was as dark as pitch at the time, and we had burnt all our flares out
while threading our way through a quantity of schooners at anchor. Two
men on the bows of the boat, after a long pause to search for some
guidance, had just given the word “all right ahead,” when we ran up on
a flat-topped rock, and found that high, almost perpendicular, cliffs
were only a few yards ahead. Throwing out our dingey, and removing
all superfluous weight from the bows, we succeeded shortly in getting
off; and guided by the stentorian shouts of some men from a schooner,
alternating with their fog-horn, we found our way alongside and made
fast to her. As we were too many even to lie down on the launch I went
aboard the schooner, the hospitable skipper of which insisted on my
turning into his bunk. He was only just back, apparently, with a load
of fish from his traps, and hearing the echo of our voices from the
cliffs had guessed something was wrong. He added, “there is fish to be
had now, and so I don’t turn in at all myself”; and sure enough, after
a shake down and some supper he and his crew disappeared into the foggy
darkness for a fresh load from the trap, while sleep reigned supreme on
board. He turned out to be a green-fish catcher, who was “making” his
fish on his vessel.

Further along the straits, at Bonne Esperance, we met with a more
serious mishap, for while returning from a visit up Salmon River our
propeller refused to rotate, and we had to depend on our sail. The
kindness of the first engineer of a sealing steamer (Mr. William
Crossman) anchored in the harbour set us all right again, however, for
he made us a complete set of new steel screws for our piston-top—our
own had given out, and we neither had means of making new ones, or
replacing them, in Labrador. After one or two other similar mishaps,
but having treated some one hundred and fifty patients, and having
received much kindness and a warm welcome wherever we had been, we
reached Battle Hospital again on the 29th of July. We brought a dying
fisherman the last 80 miles with us, which necessitated his sleeping
three nights in my cabin. He was still in the prime of life, but
pneumonia developed into gangrene of the lungs, and he subsequently
died in Battle Harbour Hospital.

The Sunday passed pleasantly and rapidly among the people here. After
evening service, held by the schoolmaster in the little church, we had
a good “fishermen’s meeting.” Dr. Bobardt was away all day visiting
sick people on a neighbouring island, and holding service among
them. No patients were yet allowed in hospital, though it now only
remained to cover the floors and get the stores in. Sister Carwardine
had therefore arranged for the nursing of one poor woman, on whom an
operation had been necessary, in a room of a cottage near at hand.

As the mail steamer was shortly expected, and would certainly bring
patients for the hospital, the following day was spent by all hands in
rendering the hospital inhabitable; and by evening our first patient
was comfortably located in a room on the ground floor, while the sister
spent her first night in hospital in an arm-chair.

Next day, before leaving for the north, Dr. Bobardt again being away
visiting, I was called on to bury a poor fellow, father of a family
of five, who had died from consumption in a neighbouring cove. The
burial-ground is a small plot at the bottom of a deep ravine on the
seaboard side of the island. On each side rose barren rocky crags,
behind was the bleak island top, while in front lay the great Atlantic,
bearing on its heaving bosom, as far as the eye could see, countless
mighty icebergs. As the sad procession wound along the defile, carrying
in its rude wood covering what was so recently a living, hopeful human
being; as they laid it in its last long resting-place amidst these cold
and desolate surroundings, the craving for something beyond the grave
burnt fiercely in every heart; while the joy of knowing of a Heavenly
Father, who has given us victory even over the grave, was realized as a
priceless possession which the world cannot give—no, nor sell either.

Our next object was to visit the coast up to Indian Harbour, calling
for coal and a few supplies left for us half-way up by the _Albert_, at
a place called Bateau. In making a narrow inlet called Francis Harbour,
we found much difficulty in getting in; for after long searching for
the entrance, it proved to be blocked with ice, and a circuitous method
inside an island was unknown to us. However, once inside the warmth
of our welcome made up for the suspense outside, and after service
in the neat and commodious parlour of the agent’s (Mr. Penny) house,
we had a _levée_ of sick visitors till midnight. We next entered a
deep narrow cleft in a high mountain, running parallel with the sea,
nowhere wider than a stone’s throw. It is very deep, and high hills of
bright red rocks rise abruptly on both hands. On the outer side are
perched houses and fishing stages. This is known as Venison Tickle. The
agent (Mr. Hawker) received us most warmly, and being himself doctor,
parson, planter, and all combined, took me round at once to the various
sick and injured. One poor old fisherman, suffering from apoplectic
paralysis, we sent to hospital at Battle, though we learnt from a
schooner that already it was nearly full.

Landing on a low island as we passed north, we found the eider-duck
nesting in considerable numbers, while in the little pools among the
rocks were young ducks and young gulls in numbers. Of the latter we
caught several for our stew-pot. We steamed thence fifteen miles to
Boulter’s Rock Harbour by a long narrow channel inside two enormous
islands, the passage being known as Squasho Run. Fog succeeded fog all
along this part of the coast, and it was only by the help of volunteer
local pilots we succeeded in finding many of the harbours.

One dark night, unable to find our way further, we dropped our anchor
inside some outlying islands called Seal Islands. It seemed to us that
we had hardly got straight and settled down for the night’s rest before
we heard a boat bumping against our side. In such a lonely place, and
in a thick drizzly fog at night, a superstitious person might well
have started. Soon we heard the soft tread of a mocassin over the
half-inch boarding which, covered with painted canvas, served us as a
roof; then a bustling at the hatchway door, and soon the broad face of
a half-breed Eskimo peered into the cabin. It appeared he had a very
sick daughter at his hut on the island, near which no doctor ever went.
He had heard of the _Princess May_ being about; and seeing our cabin
lights shining as he chanced to pass in his boat homewards, he had come
in search of assistance. Soon, swathed in oilskins, I was sitting in
the stern of his boat, while he swiftly rowed away into the darkness.
Landing, and following closely behind him over broken rock for some
quarter mile, brought me to his cottage, which, in true Labrador
fashion, was well filled with inhabitants. Among them I found two
seriously ill, one a young man of eighteen, the other a young married
woman of about thirty. On this poor woman it was necessary to operate
on our way south in order to save life even for the time; but as we
had no hospital open in winter, she had to be left in that crowded hut
to the tender mercies of the most unskilled of nurses, and though any
communication with the island has been impossible since, I fear she
will not have survived the winter.[15]

[Footnote 15: 1895. She has perfectly recovered, in the most marvellous
manner.—W. T. G.]

I was one day asked, a little further north, to visit a woman reported
to have been ill in bed for three months, and who was living up a bay
fully ten miles from any fishing station. At length, dropping our
anchor off the spot indicated, which was the mouth of a large salmon
river, we blew our whistle repeatedly to try and attract her husband’s
attention. After some time a small boat put out with one man sculling
in the stern. He seemed to approach warily, and the man piloting me
took in the situation in a moment. As soon as the small boat was
alongside, he greeted the oarsman with “It’s all up; come aboard and
surrender quietly, or you will be shot down.” The condemning reply came
back, “Indeed, sir, the river isn’t barred. It couldn’t be barred. No
nets would hold across it. It never has been barred. I wouldn’t bar
the river. You can come and see for yourself.” We got into his boat,
and he started with us to the shore, when I asked him if the launch
was safe at her anchorage, as darkness was coming on. The prompt reply
was that she would be aground on rocks at low water, and that we had
better steam across the inlet and anchor the other side, where it was
soft and good holding ground, at which our engineer at once proceeded
to get steam again. On landing, I asked for the sick woman, and was
shown into the most miserable dark hovel I ever saw. By a wretched
tin chimneyless lamp I examined my patient. She was lying clad in one
old petticoat on a few sacks spread over a kind of built-up bunk. Her
bodily ailments were fortunately not great, but as she told me, and I
believe truthfully, having no clothes to get up in, she was obliged to
stay where she was. Turning to go out, I stumbled over our boatman, who
at once commenced most profuse apologies. It appears he was just off
to destroy his “bar,” when my pilot had told him I was not an excise
officer, and the _Princess May_ was not a gunboat. So he went off to
tell the engineer the anchorage was good enough, I fear that is not the
only barred salmon river in Labrador.

Further north we steamed up Sandwich Bay, and visited, among other
places, Cartwright, now a Hudson Bay post, but founded about 1790 by
an English trader of that name. Here again we had a serious case to
deal with. A girl of fourteen had been ill with internal abscess for
between two and three years. She was sent to hospital after a trifling
operation, and remained there a month. When I returned south I found
her well and happy, and she told me she was only sorry she could not
live in hospital.

I was interested in examining at Cartwright a marble tomb, raised,
as the inscription proclaimed, “to commemorate the piety and zeal of
the founder of this colony.” Some humble lichens had, in the course
of time, grown in between the slabs, and with irresistible power had
forced them open, revealing to the prying eye within not the crumbling
dust of the departed trader, but a mighty demijohn of rum, no doubt
made mellow by long years of waiting. Alas! that there are those to-day
whose memory would be most aptly treasured by such an epigram, whom in
life, for their riches’ sake, a blinded world “delights to honour.”

We were now only two hands on the launch, the engineer and myself, for
our steward had returned to Battle Hospital. We were therefore anxious
to push ahead, and on August 10th we were glad to run into Indian
Harbour, and again “bring to” alongside the _Albert_. We found to our
sorrow that bad weather had prevented the landing of our hospital
till a month after we had expected; and, though all available hands
had been at work, it was found impossible to occupy it this season.
We therefore decided, as soon as the shell was finished and all done
that could be without cutting the chimneys, to board up the windows,
store the property in it, and leave it for the winter under care of
the nearest “Livyere.” Meanwhile Dr. Curwen and Nurse Williams would
remain on the _Albert_, and use it as their hospital. This place is
the centre of a very large number of stations, and they had already
found ample scope for work. Just before we left in the _Princess May_,
both doctor and sister were summoned over the island to treat a woman
on whom a fish stage had fallen, while they already had in the ship’s
hospital a young girl dying of consumption. The condition in which some
of our patients were when first admitted was horrible; the condition of
the women from the green-fish catchers especially; for with scarcely
any privacy, and scarcely any opportunities for washing, it was not to
be wondered at that vermin often abounded. The experience of both our
nurses tallied in this respect, and a good wash, clean clothes, and a
few days’ nursing always appeared to work marvels, even in apparently
hopeless cases. When it became evident that this poor girl must die,
she expressed her determination to go home by the first opportunity,
that, if possible, she might reach her family in Newfoundland before
the end came.

It was ten o’clock at night, and a blustering evening in Cape Webeck
Harbour, when we next met the mail steamer going south. With much
difficulty we got our poor patient into the boat, wrapped over and over
in clean blankets; two of us in the stern sheets holding the large
bundle in our arms, while Captain Trezise and his men rowed us down the
harbour. Getting her up the steamer’s side was, however, a still less
easy task, but was at last accomplished, and she was soon ensconced in
a bunk in the saloon. Fortunately we had decided that Nurse Williams
should now return to Battle Harbour to help Nurse Carwardine, for
the hospital there was now overflowing into huts around, and our
in-patients could be kept down to one or two. The nurse therefore was
able to tend to her wants during the journey down. Eventually she
reached St. Johns, where the Rev. Dr. Harvey most kindly met her,
got her to the train and off to her home; so that her last wish was
gratified, and she passed away peacefully among her loved ones.

At Cape Harrison we had a really hot Sunday, the flat cabin reflecting
the sun so fiercely from the water that our very paint began to
blister. Such a chance was not to be lost, and the fisherfolk gathered
from far and near. One company, who journeyed from their schooner in
King’s Arm, must have travelled some ten miles to us, rowing first to
Sloop Harbour, then walking over the high cape, and then rowing again
to Webeck Island; while even as we went to and fro from the meetings,
which, owing to the numbers, we were obliged to hold on the shore, we
heard sounds of hymns and praying from some of the mud huts we passed.
It was a day indeed to be remembered. Our longest single expedition
during this time had been to the Hudson Bay post of Rigoulette, up
Hamilton inlet, some fifty miles from the entrance. Here we had several
patients; and especially one little lad with a diseased bone in the
leg—part of this it was necessary to remove. At the operation we were
ably helped by the wife of the agent (Mr. Wilson), who proved herself
a most able nurse and assistant. The difference of temperature up this
long inlet is very marked, and we found the children of the house
actually picnicing outside the hut in a canvas tent. [Illustration:
The S.S. _Princess May_ in Merchantman Harbour.]




CHAPTER XII

_CONCLUSION OF SECOND VOYAGE_


Our next meeting with the _Albert_ was arranged for Hopedale, the
first station of the Moravian brethren. In the meanwhile we visited
such harbours as Ironbound Island, Ragged Islands, Roger’s Harbour,
Long Island, Ailik, Turnavik, and Winsor Harbour. Again we had one
or two serious cases: one poor fellow with cancer of the gullet; one
from whom it was necessary to amputate two fingers, and from another
one finger. While at Winsor Harbour, we decided to visit an off-lying
island, called “Double Island,” from which the Hopedale Eskimo had
their summer fishery. Unfortunately it is not even indicated on the
charts, and missing our way to it we got entangled among a series of
reefs. At sundown a strong northerly wind arose, making the water boil
in foaming breakers over the shallow patches. This however in reality
assisted us, for we were thus able to avoid the hidden dangers, as any
shallow likely to pick up the _Princess May_ was now a white seething
mass; indeed, I have found places where we saw the water break as deep
as five to fifteen fathoms. We had decided at last to “heave to” under
the lee of an island, keeping steam all night for fear of a shift of
wind, when through our glasses we descried against the horizon a ragged
tent. Steering for this we soon descried figures of some of the little
people skurrying to and fro after their fish as fast as they could go,
for the sky looked threatening, and they did not wish the fish to get
wet again. Our steam whistle at once caught their attention, and soon
two of their little boats came shooting out through the surf.

With their help we were safely moored fore and aft in a little narrow
creek, and a few minutes later saw us ashore. Amongst them we noticed
many friends of last year, especially a dear old man, a sort of
Christian father among them, named Daniel. A profuse hand-shaking
and welcoming ensued, and then they intimated they wished me to come
up to one of their tents. My Eskimo was exhausted, however, with
Auchenai—How do you do? (or, literally, Be ye strong?), and Aila,
yes, and a few other every-day expressions. When, therefore, I was
set down on a low box in the tent, with a space in front of me for
the patients to squat, and the rest of the ground available densely
packed with Esquimaux, I was confronted with the difficulties of a
veterinary surgeon. Among other things a toe, frost-bitten last winter,
had to be removed; apparently not such a painful operation as one might
have supposed at first, and one in which the patient appeared to take
a personal interest, from the proud fact that she occupied on that
account the position of most importance.

At Hopedale I left the _Albert_ again, and, joined by one of the
Moravian Brethren—a Dane (Rev. P. Hansen), proceeded at once further
north. Together we visited as far as Okkak, though the entire absence
of charts, and the innumerable islands and labyrinths, made us more
than once end up in a blind tickle. At Zoar we deposited our deck cargo
of coal, piling up wood on our cabin top instead, and lashing a ladder
against our foremast, from the top of which in the clear water it was
possible to see rocks in time to avoid them. We passed on our way
immense flocks of water-fowl. While in places the rocks shine with the
beautiful blue or yellow sheen of the Labrador felspar, the trees get
perceptibly fewer and smaller as Okkak is approached, the shrubs more
stunted, and the berries more scarce, until north of Hebron no trees at
all are found.

With much perseverance and labour the brethren at each station raise
a few potatoes, cabbages and flowers, but when trees are cut down
for wood they do not replace themselves in a man’s lifetime. It is
impossible in these pages to recount all the incidents of this part of
the trip. At each station I had numerous patients—Eskimo and white.
In the former cases my dear friend and whilom companion, the Rev. P.
Hansen, interpreted. At each station also we gathered daily for prayer
and exhortation, and for me the time passed all too quickly. Now,
however, the approach of winter was making itself felt. Schooners were
flying south before every favourable breeze, and in so small a boat as
the _Princess May_ no unnecessary delay was advisable. On the 8th of
September we again reached Hopedale, and were surprised to find the
_Albert_ still there.

A terrible tragedy had occurred in a neighbouring inlet. It appeared
some men fishing, from an island called East Turnavik, had gone up to
boil their tea-kettle at a solitary house on a promontory of Kipekok
Bay. On entering they at first found no one at home, but during the
process of tea-making came across two women lying on the floor of the
passage covered over with a counterpane. At first they thought they
were merely enjoying an afternoon sleep, but soon found both were
dead; hereupon they at once beat a hasty retreat to their own island,
and next day came back with half-a-dozen more men and the planter. A
search revealed two more dead women in an inner room, while no trace of
the two men who lived there could be found.

Next day, however, these returned with wood from the bay, saying they
had been away making coffins for the last four days. The circumstances
were so suspicious, and one of the men bore such an exceedingly
bad character on the coast—having been suspected of deeds as dark
before—that the two neighbouring planters advised an inquiry, and
sent up their steam launch to Hopedale for Dr. Curwen to come and make
an examination. From the evidence taken from the men, and the general
appearances of the case, he was convinced they had died of poisoning.
Eventually the head of the police was sent down from St. Johns, and,
confessing to another crime, the worst of the two men was taken away
and placed in Harbour Grace Jail for the winter.

Whilst endeavouring one night to navigate a narrow passage known as
“the Rattle,” the _Princess May_ had been suddenly caught by the
current, and at full speed taken a rocky bottom. The tide was falling
at the time, and all hopes of getting off before morning had to be
abandoned. Our ladder and some large blocks of wood lashed together
were therefore placed under her port bilge, and she was listed over on
to them by all the moveable weights we had. After a very uneasy night,
which fortunately held calm, we got safely off. It was necessary now
to inspect the launch’s bottom. We therefore grounded her in Hopedale
Harbour, and at low tide examined her outer casing. She proved to be
nastily dinted in one or two places: a bit of her keel was gone, and a
few inches of copper torn off here and there, but her hull was still
as sound as a drum. Not so her shaft. We found that it had worn very
considerably inside the propeller, and the outer end had so dropped
that another two inches and the screw would be unable to rotate. For
this we had no remedy, and had nothing for it but to “Go ahead.”
Sunday, the 10th of September, we spent in Hopedale, the harbour of
which was now crowded with no less than 100 schooners; and though the
Brethren put at our disposal their large chapel, capable of holding
some 400 people, Captain Trezise found it necessary in the evening to
hold an overflow service on the _Albert_.

[Illustration: An Eskimo Family, Hopedale.]

It was with no ordinary feelings of sorrow that we heard at Emily
Harbour that the _Albert_ had been ashore. To think of her splendid
frame and delicate lines the sport of these cruel jagged rocks was
heartrending. The beautiful little ship which had smiled at so many
storms, and carried those entrusted to her so many thousands of miles
so faithfully and safely. It appears she was trying to make West
Turnavik Harbour at night, and the pilot who came off from shore
mistook the blind entrance for the real one. Both anchors were at
the time ready for letting go, and the moment the mistake was noticed
were run out. But as the vessel swung to, her stern came down on the
rocks, and for nearly three hours bumped heavily. By the help of
Captain Bartlett and some sixty men she was eventually warped safely
off; but it was found necessary, in the dry dock at St. Johns, to
replace 35 feet of her keel.

Rough weather characterized our journey south, and, indeed, often
rendered it very difficult getting round the great capes at all. We
revisited, where possible, all the places we visited going north,
and also others we had been obliged to pass by. Thus we saw again
many of our former patients, distributed to many the clothing we were
able to allot them, and also had the joy of seeing once again, before
winter set in, some of those who were commencing in earnest to live
consecrated lives. When the weather kept us longer than we intended in
a harbour, we brought into use our magic lantern, for which we had some
beautiful slides of the life of Christ, Bible lands, and some simple
stories. This never failed to bring a crowd together, even if sleeping
the night in the building became necessary for those who came from too
far to return; and, indeed, we eventually often preceded our services
with the views through the magic lantern.

On Thursday, October 19th, we once more steamed into Battle Harbour,
where we found the _Albert_ had preceded us by a couple of days. Dr.
Bobardt and the sisters were still busy and in good health. Hospital
had been full all the time, and thirty-nine in-patients had been
treated. Only one other death had occurred in hospital—a young girl
from a schooner, who had died of cellulitis from neglected sores, which
had assumed the characteristics of erysipelas. We were delighted to
hear that the fishery here had been good. Mr. Hall, the agent, had
again been first away with a steamer loaded for market. After all
the time and attention he had so generously bestowed on our work, by
lending the launch when it could be spared, by loan of men for the
hospital, by entertaining nurses, doctors, and others, we could but
rejoice that his fishery had been a really successful one. Our only
regret now was that no hospital could be kept open during this winter.

Bad weather prevailed during our journey to St. Johns. The _Albert_, in
a gale, lost her boom, and blew away some canvas, while the delays to
the _Princess May_ on that coast, where no telegraphic communication
exists, gave rise to the impression that she was lost with all hands,
an impression heightened by the fact that the mail steamer, which
had encountered the same gale in the Straits of Belle Isle, had
noticed in the sea a small boat’s flag and flagpole resembling ours.
Unfortunately, therefore, it appeared in the English dailies that
we were missing. Except losing a good spirit compass and loose deck
paraphernalia, we had suffered no inconveniences. Indeed, being forced
to shelter in so many of the small harbours along the French shore,
gave us a valuable insight into the lives of the out-harbour people of
Newfoundland, and also the opportunities of helping many who need it
quite as much as do some on the Labrador.

At Toulinguet, on November 3rd, we met our old friend Captain Taylor,
of the mail steamer _Virginia Lake_, who showed us a written commission
to search all the islands for us between certain latitudes. Thence we
wired our whereabouts to St. Johns, but we heard subsequently that
that kindly office had been performed for us the day previously by the
captain of a schooner, who had passed us on his way south. The sealing
steamer _Neptune_ gave us a line across Trinity and Conception Bays,
and so, on the 7th, we ended our cruise for 1893 in St. Johns Harbour.

We found St. Johns in the excitement of a general election, and it
seemed as if there was little likelihood of our getting an audience
to listen to a report of the season’s work. However, Sir William
Whiteway kindly placed at our disposal the “Star-of-the-Sea” Hall, and
His Excellency Sir Terence O’Brien consented to preside at an evening
meeting. By the help of some good friends in St. Johns, some of our
most successful photographic plates were turned into lantern slides;
and not only was the large hall filled with friends and sympathisers,
but one hundred and fifty dollars were realized for the funds.

The _Albert_ sailed for home, having on board Dr. Curwen and the two
nurses, on Tuesday, December 28th, and after a wonderful passage,
entered Great Yarmouth Harbour on the thirteenth day, having
accomplished the long run at an average pace of nine English miles or
7·5 knots per hour.




[Illustration: A Team of Dogs in Harness.]




CHAPTER XIII

_ON DOGS AND DIFFICULTIES_


THE Esquimaux dog, unlike his Newfoundland congener, is by no means a
fiction, being an ubiquitous feature of Esquimaux life. Indeed, being
musical like his master, his propensity for nocturnal chorus keeps
him constantly in evidence; and, though he is never heard to bark, he
manages often to leave a deep impression on an incautious stranger.

On his dog’s pluck and endurance the master’s safety often depends, and
to his marvellous instinct for finding human habitations many a man,
hopelessly lost in a snowstorm on the icefield, owes his existence.
Yet the Eskimo, finding it ample trouble to satisfy his own needs,
never adds to his trouble by feeding his dogs in summer time, with the
result that the exigencies of existence have considerably sharpened
their faculties.

To look at, they closely resemble the grey wolf of the prairie, and
wolves mingling with the team would scarcely be recognised by an
untrained eye. Usually the dogs wander in summer around the land-wash,
in troops of say fifty, eating the offal below the fish stages; or when
caplin schools are close inshore, they wade into the water and swallow
the fish alive. Always lean and lank at this time of the year, they
never neglect to lay up against an evil day, a fact that becomes most
ludicrously apparent on these occasions, for they “swells wisibly.”

Perhaps the most interesting sight is to see them catching flounders.
The fish lie buried in the sand in shallow water, and as the dog’s paw
comes down on one it struggles to get away. He then literally “puts his
foot down,” and after it his head, which disappears under water only to
reappear with a struggling victim. This is carried kicking to the land,
to be devoured at leisure.

The door of the chapel at the Moravian station of Hopedale was one day
accidentally left ajar. Such a golden opportunity for a meal was not to
be wasted, and a company of dogs soon found its way in. Some tempting
hymn-books and litanies were shortly brought to light, redolent with
blubber from the thumbs of the worshippers. Needless to say they were
sacrificed at the only shrine dogs recognise.

On another occasion a similar oversight let them into the
tenderly-nurtured kitchen garden of the Brethren. The dogs rased
the cabbages to the ground, and even carried away with them the few
highly-prized wurzels.

Modesty is a virtue of which the Eskimo dog is seldom guilty. I was
visiting one day a bedridden patient. As the outer door opened, a
fragrant scent as of a dinner preparing was wafted outward. Suddenly
an avalanche swept me off my legs, and a pack of dogs, whisking the
stew-pot off the fire, began to fight savagely over its contents,
the more so as each, having burnt its nose in the boiling liquid,
attributed his affliction to his neighbour. Meanwhile the house filling
with steam and Eskimo imprecations, the latter rendered forcible by
long harpoon handles, made me almost sorry I had called.

An Eskimo’s financial condition may be gauged by the number of his
dogs, and no one with less than six would rank as “carriage folk.”
Eight to thirteen normally form a team, each being harnessed, by a
single walrus hide trace of a different length, to the komatik. The
leader will be some twenty-six yards away, which enables the team to
clamber over or round hummocky ice. The driver on these occasions jumps
off to help the sleigh over, while, to prevent breaking, the komatik
is made of numbers of short wide cross boards lashed by strong tendons
across two longitudinal pieces, no nails being used. The runners are
shod with ribs of whale, with iron, or with mud. A slot is made in the
snow and filled with soft mud, which at once freezes. This is next
frozen on to the wood, and then planed or chopped smooth with an adze.
As there are no reins, the leading dog is trained to obey the voice. At
the shout “Auk” he goes to the right, and at “Ra” to the left, and so
on, the others all following him. If those behind are not pulling well,
the leader will drop back among them and bite at them. They always
pull in the same place in a team. Thus three dogs, the whole team of
a poor man, were lent to pull with six others. They were first placed
in front, but would not pull, being frightened at so many dogs behind
them. When, however, the leader was left in front and the other two put
last of all, the whole team ran capitally. Mr. Young tells us he once
put a young dog in front of his old leader, a magnificent old fellow on
whom he always could rely in danger. Before he had, however, mounted
the komatik, he found the pup scampering away loose—the leader had
bitten through the traces. He refastened it three times, always with
the same result. At last he gave his old leader a good whipping. The
old dog’s spirit was completely broken by this treatment, and it so
felt its double disgrace, it was never, to the day of its death, the
same brave, trusty dog.

The dogs greatly enjoy their work, and when harnessed in get
tremendously excited, at times even turning on their own drivers. To
correct them a short whip, with an enormously long lash, all of walrus
hide, is so dexterously used that an expert driver can flick a piece
out of any particular dog’s ear.

Occasionally, a refractory dog is pulled in by its trace for
punishment. They know the meaning of this, and anticipate the beating
by a lively howling; so that merely to shorten a trace, may exert a
good moral effect on a team.

The “trail” is usually over the frozen sea, the land being too uneven.
Good dogs will cover from 70 to 100 miles in a day. When starting in
the morning the snow is covered with little icicles, formed by the
mid-day sun melting the frozen surface. As this is apt to make the
feet of the dogs bleed, they are shod with a bag of seal-skin, tied
round the ankle. Three small holes are cut for the claws. A pup shod
for the first time, holds up his paws in the air alternately; but
once he learns to appreciate the fact that shoes save his feet from
being cut, though he will always eat any ordinary piece of skin, such
as on a kayak or a skin boot, he rarely eats his own shoes. They do,
however, bite at, and eat the harness, especially of the dog in front
of them. Mr. Young[16] tells of a big dog which, though apparently
always hard at work, never seemed to get tired like the rest. It always
seemed to strain at its trace, and kept looking round, apparently for
the driver’s approval. His suspicions, however, were aroused, and one
day, cutting loose the trace, he fastened it by a single thread to the
komatik. Sure enough, the dog strained and worked as hard as ever, but
it _never broke the single thread_.

[Footnote 16: _Stories from Indian Wigwams_, R.T.S., by Rev. Egerton
Young.]

When the ice is good, dogs will maintain eight miles an hour, at other
times they can only advance at a walk; while, yet again, when the ice
is surging up and down over the sea, and wind and snow are against
them, the weight of the sleigh will even drag them backwards. These
dogs are exceedingly heavy, and their dragging power is enormous.
It takes a full-grown man to hold one in leash. A team of fifteen
dogs took six people on the sleigh “like a house on fire.” They are
very quick to recognise the danger of being cut off from the land,
especially when water comes over the ice, and they will then throw
their whole strength into the work. Many times when a driver, overtaken
by night, perhaps having missed the trail from heavy snow, and quite
exhausted gives up the unequal struggle, the unerring instinct of the
dogs finds full play, and they rarely fail to reach shelter of some
kind. At night the traces are unhitched and stamped down into the snow,
for lack of anything to tie them to. This keeps them from straying.
Their dole of food is then given them, probably rotten caplin and
seal blubber; after which they sleep out on the snow, even when the
temperature is 50° below zero. Yet if other dogs are near, and they can
get at them, most of the night will be spent fighting. It is often the
capacity for carrying food for the dogs that limits the journey. To
prevent this, the Moravians make depôts of dog food along the coast
during summer.

One day an old Eskimo arrived at Nachvak from Cape Chidley, a distance
of about 100 miles. When asked where his dog food was, he answered,
“Me go home to-morrow, then feed them,” showing the power of endurance
of these dogs. On one occasion during a long journey a traveller (P.
Mackenzie) shot some caribou deer, and taking all the meat he wanted,
pursued his journey. While building his snow hut for the night, a fresh
herd of deer passed within scent of the dogs. All, with the exception
of their leader, a small bitch, managed to free their traces and gave
chase. By chance they came on the dead quarry, and, falling to, at
once gorged themselves on it. As they, returned to the camp, one large
powerful dog was observed carrying a whole haunch in his mouth, and was
seen to go and lay it down in reach of the still captive little leader.

These dogs can be dangerous at times. Once the team of a settler living
in Seal Islands ran away. They came back savage as wolves, and it
transpired that they had killed and eaten a little girl, of seven years
old, while away. Of course their owner was forced to shoot them. This
tendency to wander was recently put to good use. A solitary settler and
his wife were suddenly struck down with influenza. The man developed
lung symptoms, and the woman also became too ill to feed either herself
or him. She could hardly crawl as far as the cupboard for food; and
they both stood in great danger of being starved, though food was in
the house. In this extremity the woman, who could write, scribbled on a
piece of paper, “Come over quickly,” and tied it round one of the dog’s
necks. The dog carried it to the nearest neighbour, a distance of ten
miles over the ice, and eventually returned with help. Possibly as the
old couple could no longer get about to give the dogs food, that might
account for its setting off for another house.

In the water the Eskimo dog is quite at home. I have known them swim
home from a desert island a good mile from land, and have watched them
playfully chasing one another’s tails as they swam about in that cold
water.

Fighting, however, is their chief diversion. Each team always has its
king, who maintains his position solely by his might. I have watched
from a boat a pack banished to an island in summer to keep them out of
mischief. As we rowed round, a fine young dog, with the only female
close alongside, moved by curiosity followed us out to the end of every
little promontory, but the rest all maintained a respectful distance
behind. Next week, when we passed again, we found he had been deposed,
and then woe betide him for some time. The entire pack seem to combine
to pay off their pent-up grudges against him, and at times he is so
harried he takes to the water. I have watched a late leader standing up
to his shoulders in water eyeing his tormentors to see if he could
escape unobserved; but every attempt he made to come ashore a combined
rush was made, and he was forced to retire again.

[Illustration: Eskimo Family.]

At night on travel a snow hut is built. Half an hour is long enough for
this. The snow is cut in blocks—nowadays usually with an old cavalry
sabre—from the inside of the circle chosen for the house. Thus the hut
goes down and up at the same time. A hole is left at the top for the
air, while a block is cut to fit into the door from the outside, after
all are in. If a tent is carried, it is of the usual reindeer skins,
sewn together with tendons. The sleeping bag is made of seal-skin with
the hair outside, and lined with reindeer skin with the hair inside.
Almost any cold can be borne in it; and if your family are travelling
with you, and share your bag, they are then said to be positively warm.
The skin boots always worn are so exquisitely sewn, that, like the
kayaks, they are quite watertight.

However, there is no water in Labrador in winter, for even the
perspiration from the men’s bodies, if they do violent work, freezes
inside the clothing; and, as in cases of Arctic explorers, it may
become necessary to take off one’s clothes at night to hammer out the
ice from the inside.

To do this sewing it is necessary to chew the edges of the skins soft.
One woman said to me, “Me no good now,” showing me that her teeth were
all too far worn down to be of any use in boot-making. The Eskimo’s
teeth meet one another, and do not overhang like Europeans’. Soft
bread gets so hard frozen that biscuits have to be carried, which,
with lumps of meat, are stowed away under their clothes next the skin,
in order to keep it soft. Spirits even will freeze in the bottle; but
neither whites nor Eskimo carry alcohol, or dare resort to it in cold
weather, if they had it. These people form an excellent apology for
total abstinence, as do the Laps, who drink only coffee. In England and
the United States cold weather is used as an apology for whisky. Drink
soon destroys the Eskimo. Yet they, like white men, willingly become
its slaves. They have even buried in their oil casks, water, molasses,
and old mouldy biscuits, in order to get fermented liquor, when once
habituated to it.

The Moravians have, however, kept the traffic in check, partly by not
teaching the Eskimo English, and partly by Christian teaching. One
dear old fellow—named Zacharias—had in his early days been expelled
by the Eskimo from Okkak for drunkenness and being a nuisance to the
community. Becoming a Christian under the preaching at Hopedale, he was
now seeking to get back to Okkak to show them what the grace of God can
do in the dark heart of a drunken Eskimo. Very practical are some of
these Eskimo Christians. One Nathaniel last winter, while going to his
sealing ground, was carried off to sea by the ice drifting off. When
eventually he managed to escape, he told the missionaries: “I felt
like Peter. I could not pray, though I thought I must die. I had not
lived a good life.” On another occasion a woman actually went and gave
back all the property she had won from another by gambling, when told
it was displeasing to God.

The following translation of letters from some much respected leaders
among them, gives an insight into their feelings and ideas. One wrote
to us as follows: “In spirit I am among you, my fellow-servants. Only a
little I want to say to you. Because the Lord, He helps us, you as well
as us—we in Labrador. In one faith and love in that which Jesus has
wrought for us, that we can walk through Him that strengthens us. Once
more we have reason to be thankful, because the physician came; we are
often reminded that our souls also must have medicine, _i.e._ the Word
of God. I salute you all. The Lord may help every one of us. You as
well as me. Zacharias. The one that is in Hopedale.”

Another wrote, “My wife and I and all the Eskimo wish very sincerely to
thank all the good believers on the other side of the sea, who in their
love have thought of us, and sent a doctor to help and assist us in
our illness. We do not understand the language of those you have sent
here, yet we rejoice that they are preaching the Word of God faithfully
to the many fishermen who work along the Labrador. My prayer and wish
are that the Lord will protect them on their journey, and bless you
and them in the work. My wife and I greet all those who love the Lord
Jesus Christ.”

  “DANIEL AND JOSEPHINA.”

When the missionaries desire to punish an Eskimo, it is generally done
by (1) refusing to allow him personally in the store; (2) ejecting him
from the choir or band; (3) cutting him off from communion. An Eskimo,
never having severer punishment, feels each of these very acutely.

Cartwright punished them much more summarily. In his dry way, he
remarks: “July 1. Having reproved an Eskimo in a very angry tone for
stealing a skein of thread, I gave him a few strokes with a stick. He
instantly made resistance; when catching him in my arms, I gave him
a cross buttock (a method of throwing unknown to them), and pitched
him with great force head first out of my tent. The rest applauded my
action as just, and had a high opinion of my lenity.”

Conveying Bible ideas to the Eskimo has not been easy. It must be
remembered they have never seen sheep or lambs, horse or mule, fruit
tree or corn, sowing or harvest. Nor have they much idea of kindness to
animals at all. Every animal but a dog is to be killed, and even their
dogs are to be kept at a considerable distance. But they are themselves
very grateful for kindness, as the above extracts show.




CHAPTER XIV

_ON SEALS AND SEALERS_


[Illustration: The S.S. _Sir Donald_.]

The hair seal, locally “swile,” affords to the Newfoundland fisherman
almost the only means of work in winter which will help him to eke out
the meagre living provided by his Labrador voyages. True, there is a
home frozen-herring trade, but it is limited to the west coast; and
also the new railway employs a certain number of men as long as the
inclemencies of winter allow work to proceed. But it is to the spring
sealing, or “going to the ice,” as they call it, that most look for
the extra few dollars to help fill the children’s mouths. Not long ago
every one could go to the ice, for then only sailing-boats went, and
the wealth reaped from the voyages passed mostly into the fishermen’s
pockets. Now all is revolutionized, and the sealing is in the hands
of half-a-dozen firms, that send out big steamers, carrying crews
numbering as many as three hundred men. Moreover, the value of seal-oil
has greatly decreased, and the expenses of the steamers eat up much of
the profit. There are not a few whom one hears growling, “Steam has
ruined Newfoundland.”

The hair seal, “Phoca Greenlandica,” must not be confounded with the
fur seal of the Pacific, for though the former is found in the Pacific,
the latter is never found in the North Atlantic. The fur seal is as a
rule larger, has much longer hands and feet in proportion to his body,
and also a much longer neck. He is apparently a much more powerful
swimmer. There are, however, several kinds of hair seal. The largest
is the hood seal. A truly magnificent animal, and one that shows
much courage in defending himself against his enemies. Sitting up on
his tail and hind legs, he defends himself with teeth and flippers,
protecting his head from injury by blowing out a bladder-shaped and
shot-proof excrescence on it. The usual method to kill a seal is to
hit it upon the nose with a club, called a seal-bat, but when once
fairly roused the bull hood seal is invulnerable there. An old sealer
described to me a battle between one of these fellows and a polar
bear, in which he told us the seal only yielded to be eaten after a
prolonged and bloody struggle. It takes two men at least to kill one,
for one man has to divert the animal’s attention by striking its tail,
while the other endeavours to hit it under the jaw as it turns round.

The most important hair seal, however, is the harp. It is the variety
which resort to the ice to breed in such countless thousands, and which
the sealing vessels go out in pursuit of. The process of breeding
is most interesting. The following account was given me by Captain
Blandford, of Newfoundland, perhaps the most successful of all the bold
sealing captains:—

“Soon after we got jammed in the ice there appeared from the water
four or five old seals, which scrambled up on to its surface. Within
five minutes there were 500 seals on it, and in half an hour 200,000
as nearly as we could guess. Scarcely had they come to rest on the ice
when they commenced throwing their young, and at once, after whelping,
those close to us, being somewhat frightened by the ship, jumped back
into the sea, leaving the little seals whimpering exactly like babies.”

The young are born about the 1st of March, and are very small, fat, and
snowy white, remaining so up till the 20th to 25th, _i.e._ about three
weeks, between which date and the 1st of April they are big enough to
take to the water. During this period they are known as “whitecoats.”
They grow so rapidly that you can almost see them growing, though on
the above occasion those close to the ship did not grow nearly as
rapidly as those farther away, for the dams were shy about coming to
give them suck.

The “whitecoats” are not large enough to kill until they are fourteen
days’ old, so that on this occasion the crew had to wait. Now, however,
by law no sailing vessel may leave for the ice until the 8th of March,
and no steamer till the 12th, under a penalty of $2,000, which gives
the seals a chance to get sizeable; nor is a vessel now allowed to make
a second voyage the same year, if she has once come back loaded. This
prevents the extermination of the mother seals. Great excitement always
exists when the sealers are about to start; sometimes it is necessary
to cut their way out of the harbour, in which they have been imprisoned
during the winter months, with dynamite, saws, and crowbars, the way
being cleared beforehand, that not an hour may be lost after the clocks
announce midnight of the 11th. This year, 1894, while blasting a way
out of the ice in Greenspond Harbour, the S.S. _Walrus_ was severely
damaged by the explosion of the dynamite, which shattered her bows, and
killed some of her men. The ice was ten feet thick.

The vessels may start from any part of the island, north or south, but
no one place is always best, the position of the seals varying every
season. There is much competition to get a place among the crews, and
the men are carefully selected for their pluck, energy, experience, and
physical capacities. These are queer-looking craft to the unaccustomed
eye these steam sealers of about 300 to 400 tons burden, with their
outside thick sheathing of hard wood, called “ice chocks,” and their
huge double stems, filled between with from nine to twelve feet of
solid oak, built for charging through floe ice. For when shut in the
steamer will back far enough to gain good impetus, and then dash full
at the weakest part of the floe. Usually the sloping forepost allows
the vessel to rise up on to the ice, the great weight then breaking
down into clear water. Anything loose on deck is of course upset, as
are any of the crew who happen not to be holding some support. All
are rigged with three masts, and can sail as well as steam; and the
screw being fixed in a slot can easily be pulled up out of the water
at these times. Each masthead is fitted with a barrel or crow’s nest,
from which a careful look-out for seals is constantly maintained. When
once discovered, the next thing is to keep them to yourself, and, if
possible, mislead any other vessels near, who might be apt to join in
and so lessen your prize. A captain, well known for his success, was
lately dogged in this way by a fresh hand. To mislead his rival the
captain steamed into one of the large bays, where, it so happened, he
got frozen in while the raw hand, turning out, caught a full voyage.

Once alongside the floe, the men jump off on to the ice, and at once
the work begins. Sometimes they work in pairs, one man shooting the
seals, and his chum, who is called “the dog,” following up, cutting
off the tail from the dead seal to “mark it,” and then gathering them
in heaps, and putting up a pole with a flag or a piece of liver as a
claim. These are then said to be “panned.” This is technically called
“swatching.” When shooting, 1,400 seals in a day is good work for a
crew, though they have killed 3,000; but when it is only necessary to
“club” them with the seal-bat, 25,000 have been killed in a day, and
47,000 in two days. Sculping (scalping?) is the next process—that is
taking off the skin and fat. This scarcely takes a minute. The seal is
thrown on its back, ripped up from chin to tail, and the fat and skin,
known as the “pelt,” are torn off. The body is no use, and is left on
the ice, except that occasionally the hearts are cut out and strung on
the hunter’s belts, as a reserve of food in case of necessity.

The mother seals show great sagacity in finding the particular hole,
through which she comes and goes for food, among so many thousand
others, and at once she finds her own little white pup. They will
evince much self-sacrifice in trying to rescue their offspring from
danger, at times carrying them in their fore flippers to escape being
nipped by ice, or drawing them into the water to teach them to swim.
Alas, after a sealer’s visit she will only find a quivering red corpse
when she returns. Let us hope she does not recognise it.

When another crew is also at work on the same patch of seals the
greatest expedition is naturally used, and under these circumstances
the seals will often only be “batted” and stunned, not stabbed to the
heart as well, before being skinned. It is this that has given rise to
the charges of cruelty, for the naked body has been seen to move around
after the operation. Otherwise there is no more cruelty in killing
seals than in killing cattle or poultry, and any man who is humane in
one will naturally be humane in the other; nor do I think you will find
anywhere a more humane set of men than you will among Newfoundland
fishermen.

Captain X. was once just forcing his way through ice towards a pack of
seals when he sighted a rival vessel coming up under his lee. Backing
out, he at once altered his course away from the seals to mislead the
other, but was too late to prevent them sighting his seals. The second
vessel, being much faster, now ran in between my friend and the ice,
and passing him on the starboard side gave the order “hard a starboard”
to force him out from his own cutting. Incensed at this, Captain X.
from the barrel shouted “hard a port,” and went straight for his
rival’s stem. Fortunately an intervening pan of ice prevented a fatal
accident, but he ran his bowsprit well over the other’s counter. All
hands from the foremost vessel were overboard and hard at work killing
and panning seals before Captain X. could land his men; so he shouted,
as his final order, “Hand aboard the dead seals; never mind killing
live ones,” and then, calmly descending, went and had refreshments with
the other captain in the other vessel’s cabin, while the crews were
left to fight it out as best they could. They are a brave, generous,
and skilful set of men, these sealing captains, and reck little of
danger or hardship.

Work proceeds during the night by torchlight, and the scattered fires,
with their ruddy glow on the heaps of dead seals and uncouth-looking
figures at work, must present indeed a weird sight. Now the pelts
have to be brought back to the ship; and in this work the physical
capacities of each hunter are tried to the utmost. Six pelts is a full
“tow” for one man. Often when the ice is hummocky, or perhaps broken up
into pieces, called “slob” ice, and it is necessary to jump from pan to
pan, or again when the distance from the ship is long, and the approach
of night or the fog render travelling almost impossible, are these men
tempted to abandon the hardly-won pelts, and get home themselves to the
ship and safety.

Sometimes one hunter will be long adrift from the steamer, and all the
rest being back, and all the seals in that patch boarded, the captain
is anxious to get off—how anxious, if the patch was a small one and
other seals are near, perhaps only a sealing captain knows,—for all
ships must be home by April 21st, full or empty. Yet though so much
depends on it a stray hunter has never yet been abandoned. It costs a
large sum to send these vessels to the ice, and a “clean ship” means a
big loss to the merchant, and no money for the men.

[Illustration: Eskimo on an Island near Okkak.]

Sharks, even in these latitudes, are not slow to gather at the smell
of slaughter, and can be caught with boathooks between the pans. It is
not a rare thing for men to slip off the pans into the water, and it
requires no little skill to get out again without help; for the water,
naturally, is very cold, and one is apt again and again to slip off
back into the water while trying to climb on to the ice. Acts of great
heroism are performed sometimes in rescuing a man thus endangered;
in one case, the pans being very small, it was not possible to stand
on one in order to pull the man out. The rescuer, therefore, quickly
throwing off his outer garments, came jumping from piece to piece,
making a grab at the struggling man as he passed, trying to push him on
far enough for him to catch hold. The second run he succeeded, but, of
course, himself ran great peril in the attempt. The vessels eventually,
loaded to the gunwales if they have been fortunate, return to St.
Johns, every hole and corner being used for stowing the pelts, so that
at times the crew will have to sleep wherever they can find a dry spot,
even on deck or in the boats.

Once in harbour, the fat is separated and put into enormous vats, the
oil being squeezed out from the blubber by their own weight, and being
eventually drawn off, clarified, and sold. Now, however, the blubber
is usually “rendered” by means of a steam mincer. The skins are salted
without being stretched, and are then exported “green,” for making
into leather for boot tops, gloves, etc. When the white coat is a year
old, he is dark in colour on the back, lighter on the belly, and is
known as a “bedlamer harp.” When he is three years old, a large black
saddle-shaped mark begins to appear over his back, and he is called a
full “bedlamer.” When he is four years old, the saddle is fully and
clearly marked, and the seal is then known as the “old harp.”

Seals, as is well known to those who visit Zoological Gardens, are very
easily tamed, and display almost the sagacity of dogs. Tales are told
of seals which have become so thoroughly tame that they will come and
lie before the fire, making friends with the dog and cat; while one,
when it had been found too expensive to keep, and had been taken out to
sea and dropped overboard, followed the boat ashore again and again,
even getting in at the window when the door had been shut against it.
The seal is used by the Eskimo for nearly everything. The stretched
coat of the bowel serves instead of glass. Their boats are entirely
of skin. Their clothing almost all skin. Their winter food almost all
seal meat and blubber. Dog food, dog harness, dog whips, etc., are all
of seal, or of walrus hide. Moreover, to the settlers, their skins for
boots and their fat for oil are invaluable.

In Labrador the “old harps” are caught either in the fall or spring,
when the sea is first freezing over or the ice first breaking up, and
always along shore, in one of the following ways. Strong twine nets,
with very large meshes, are anchored out on the bottom in about twenty
to thirty fathoms of water, off prominent headlands, or in the mouths
of bays and inlets known to be frequented by seals. These are buoyed
on the surface, and in these the seals mesh and drown themselves. This
industry is attended with much danger and hardship, for it involves
rowing out in all weathers in small boats to clear the nets. Sometimes
the buoys are under the ice, and the process known as “creeping” has to
be undertaken to find the nets at all, for it will not do to lose these
most valuable possessions.

If the nets are not recovered by New Year’s Day, they are lost; yet
occasionally they may be recovered immediately the ice goes in April,
when, the men tell me, both nets and seals in them are good; but if
much time elapses after the floe drifts off, both rot rapidly and are
destroyed by animalculæ.

Often hours must be spent “creeping,” and then, perhaps, only some
one else’s nets are taken, while all the while each must be carefully
watching the other to see he is not getting frostbitten. The nose,
ears, or chin will become frozen unknown to the owner and another will
cry out “your ears are dead,” the parts having turned snowy white.
Then begins the painful and tedious process of rubbing the part with
snow—woe betide the sufferer who goes in a heated room, or uses hot
water; for a certainty he will lose his ears or his nose—then the
creeping must be again proceeded with; or when the nets are partly
hauled bad weather will overtake them, perhaps a sudden squall from
the high land sweeps down on the little open boat, and the tragedy of
“the three fishers” is apt to be enacted over again. In one case, a man
described to me how, when out with his brother and another man, while
in the act of hauling into the boat a square flipper seal of larger
size than usual, the little craft capsized, and his brother, getting
cramp from cold, slipped off the bottom of the boat to which all three
were clinging. Fortunately, the other two managed, it being a calm day,
to hold on till a rescue was effected. It is cold work at best, and,
as one stalwart fellow said, “jest a bit hard, that when a man comes
home real hungry it should take him half an hour to get the ice off his
face before he can find his mouth.” “Yes,” chimed in another, “I lost
two toes and this ear,” showing that he had been cropped as if at the
pillory. I have myself seen the frozen breath hanging from men’s beards
and moustaches till, from nose to chest, it was one huge white mass.

The easier way of catching the “old harps” is with a submerged room
of net, resembling the cod-trap, with the difference that the wall
which is on the side the seals enter from is lowered to the bottom. A
watch is kept from the shore, and as soon as the seals enter the room
a rope attached to this wall is wound up on a capstan on the land, and
the seals are thus imprisoned. They are now given time to entangle
themselves in the net, and so get drowned, or the boat rows off and
the hunter shoots the seal before taking it out of the water; for the
seals would bite badly if given the chance. The net is thirty to forty
fathoms deep, and is set in about six to ten fathoms of water.

The last variety of hair seal is known as the “bay seal.” It frequents
the shores, bays, and mouths of fresh-water rivers, up which it breeds,
all the summer, and is caught either in mesh nets, or shot from a boat
as it puts up its head to breathe. This feat is rendered more easy by
the natural curiosity of the seal. As soon as it spies the boat it
raises its head and shoulders out of water to get a good view of the
stranger. If you now remain quite still, and especially if you can
imitate the “Hough, hough” of the animal, it will dive down and in a
minute come up nearer the boat. I have been almost ashamed to shoot as
it opened its large, human eyes, so full of inquisitiveness. “Bang!”
If you are a good shot, your seal will be dead, a bullet through his
brain, and you must at once row and pick him up while his few kicks
keep him afloat. I remember seeing one sink after being shot, as we
rowed off to the _Princess May_ from the shore one day. We stopped
over the spot, and peering down into the crystal water, could see him
ten fathoms down. Suddenly, one last kick—only it seemed a slight
movement—and the carcase rose to the surface for the last time. Up,
up! We watched it gyrating round and round, and as it reached the
surface, grabbed hold of one flipper and slung it into the boat. We
had one or two good meals off that fellow, for we hung him up from our
forestay, and the frosty air kept him sweet and fresh as long as we
needed him. Had he not arisen we should have got him up by means of our
“jiggers,” _i.e._, our heavy leaded hooks.

The Eskimo harpoon their seals from the kayak, occasionally shooting
it first; but shooting accurately from a kayak is no easy matter. The
harpoon is made of light wood, about three feet in length. On the end
of this is fixed a whole walrus tusk, to carry the loose barbed iron
top, and also to weight it and carry it truly home. As soon as the seal
is struck it dives, taking the harpoon with it, but as the harpoon
is attached by about twenty fathoms of walrus hide to an inflated
air-tight seal-skin, the hunter spies it, as soon as it comes up,
even if it ever succeeds in carrying the buoy down. A few strokes of
the paddle brings the kayak once more alongside, and the seal is soon
put _hors de combat_ with a lance, lashed on the back of the little
boat, and the hunter starts for home, or it is towed home alongside
the kayak. When one year old the bay seal is called a “jar seal,” and
its skin is poor; in the second year it is a “doter,” and becoming
speckled, in the third year, it is a “ranger,” and is then very
beautiful, being checkered silver and black all over.




[Illustration: Eskimo in Reindeer Tent, Okkak.]




CHAPTER XV

_ON THE ESQUIMAUX OR ESKIMO_


It was a still moonlight night, and the _Albert_ lay at anchor in one
of those numberless creeks in which the venturous fishermen hide away
their schooners, while in their small boats they are snatching from the
very edges of the reefs their precious fares of fish.

We were below decks, dressing the wounds of a fisherman in the
_Albert’s_ little cabin, the only sounds being the moan of my patient
or the lapping of the water against the ship’s side, when the silence
was suddenly broken by the sound as of many voices singing. The air was
very familiar:—

    “There’s a land that is fairer than day,
      And by faith we can see it afar,
    For our Father dwells over the way
      To prepare us a dwelling-place there.”

Mounting the gangway, I found the deck crowded by a number of the
quaintest little figures. They were dressed in skins, with snow-white
jumpers topped by long pointed cowls standing high up over their heads.
Some sat cross-legged on the bulwarks or hatches, while others, in
their seal-skin boots, were gliding noiselessly about in the moonlight,
till imagination conjured up “the merry elves” of childhood. The early
Norsemen called them skrellings or weaklings. They call themselves
Innuits, “the people,” because they say God went on creating till they
appeared, then He was satisfied, and created no more. Eskimo = raw meat
eater, and is a term of opprobrium conferred on them by the Indians.

Soon all were down in our main hold, chattering, laughing, and pleased
as children, at the _Albert’s_ fittings and at our attempts to
understand their remarks. The one that acted as leader spoke a little
broken English, and from him we learned that they had come from a group
of islands lying outside us with some boat-loads of dry fish for a
planter; that they had been puzzled by our strange rig, and so had come
aboard to see us.

When their leader had explained to them that we were a “Gospel ship,”
and had things to heal the sick, their merry, round, flat faces grew
sunnier than ever. All heads were uncovered at once, displaying mops
of long straight black hair, cut fringe-like level with the eyebrows.
Then they all broke out singing again, squatting all round the hold
on their haunches or on the floor, while, to our surprise, one seated
himself at the harmonium and played it excellently, others performing
on two concertinas and two cornets. They sang in parts in their own
language, but hymn tunes well known to us, so our crew all joined in,
and kept it up till the watch called “All hands off board.” Since
then we have seen and learnt much of this simple people; “Uskies” the
fishermen call them, and we all like them greatly.

Not many heathen Eskimo remain in Labrador, yet between Ungava
and Cape Chidley some are still to be found. They recognise a god
(Tongarsuk), a good spirit, and also lesser spirits (Tongaks), whom
he sends to tell the priests (angekoks) how to heal diseases, and
how to tell the weather. The Devil is a vague kind of female spirit,
apparently unnamed. These angekoks are really delphic oracles, who
make supposititious journeys to the bowels of the earth to consult
Tongarsuk. The journey must be in winter, in the dark at night time,
and the angekok remains alone in his hut with his head tied between his
legs, and his arms behind his back, while his soul is off to heaven or
hell. To become an angekok poglit, _i.e._ fat priest or chief priest,
his wandering spirit must be dragged by one toe to the sea by a white
bear, and there swallowed by a sea lion and the same white bear. Then
it must be spued up and return to his body, which is shut up in a dark
house. A drum and other noises are kept up during the ceremony.[17]

They have a vague tradition of a flood, saying that the world upset
once, and all but one man were drowned. They prove this by the fact of
shells being found high above the sea, and even the remains of a whale
on a high mountain. They believe in a future life and a happier one
than this, where there is perpetual summer, and they locate it at the
bottom of the sea, whence they get their richest possessions, or in the
bowels of the earth. Reindeer are there quite common, and their beloved
seals are ever ready, swimming in a large boiling kettle.[17]

[Footnote 17: _The Eskimo_, by Dr. F. Nansen.]

Nansen tells us they thought that all inanimate objects had spirits,
and that this is the reason that they buried with the warrior his boat
and weapons, and often figures like dolls, possibly to represent his
wives. I found several of these old graves, and two I examined. One,
evidently very ancient, was perched on a high central promontory,
overlooking the entrances to two bays; perhaps in order that as the
harp seals or wild birds passed, the warrior might, even in death,
look down upon those who of yore so oft paid tribute to his skill. The
body in every grave is simply laid on the surface on its back, in its
clothes—in one grave a female skeleton lay alongside a male one. Over
it is built a rude structure roofed with large flat stones, so that
the view should be unobstructed. In a small cache alongside the above
grave were two wooden figures of females, an ivory harpoon head and the
remains of the shaft, the skin-cleaning instruments, and the remains of
a stone lamp.

In another, further south, I found an iron sword about three feet long,
used for cutting snow blocks for snow houses, a dagger with a curved
blade, a clasp knife, an old pot of iron, a nail or needle case, a lead
buckle silvered over, a whetstone, and a few other simple household
implements, while in each case the remains of the kayak or canoe, the
paddle and the harpoon were lying near.

The skipper of a Newfoundland vessel told me how one of his men took
some frankincense from one of these graves. That night the crew were
startled by one of the hands shouting out, “There is a man in the
cabin!” though it was all dark at the time. A lamp was lit, and the
same man shouted, “There he goes, up the hatchway!” The others chaffed
him and blew out the light. Very soon shouts were again heard, “There
he is, an Eskimo, searching in Tom’s bunk.” After that the lamp was
kept lighted, and next day the grave was restored.

The early Moravian missionaries found it very difficult to convey
to the Eskimo the Bible teachings of our Saviour’s love and of God
as our Father. They had no word for love; neither sheep nor lambs,
seed-time nor harvest, silver nor gold were familiar to them, and all
the oriental similes of the sacred book were unintelligible. Yet the
missionaries’ Christ-like lives during 130 years have accomplished what
their words could not express.

In A.D. 1000 the Eskimo extended as far south as Newfoundland. In 1790
a tribe five hundred strong dwelt in the Straits of Belle Isle. Now
only a few dwell south of Hopedale, three hundred miles north of the
same straits, and only some two to three thousand north of that place.
Contact with white men has killed them off, at times by small-pox or
diphtheria, but usually by tubercular consumption. The two racial tides
now meet at Hopedale, and here the Eskimo appear least healthy.

The nomad life in skin tents has been abandoned for wooden and mud
huts. The seal-skin clothes have largely given way to inferior cotton
and European goods. The “blubber” food is largely replaced by “flour
and molasses.” The art of kayaking is nearly lost, and the Eskimo
have become less and less reliant on their own powers of procuring a
livelihood, while guns and powder have largely diminished the supply
of game. This has well been exemplified around the mission station
of Zoar. The Eskimo here had contracted a habit of taking out their
supplies from the Moravians, but secretly traded their fish and fur
with the nearest Hudson Bay station at Davis Inlet. Thus they ran up
large debts, which eventually the Brethren refused to increase. Soon
after, while two missionaries were in the store, some bullets were
fired right through the wooden walls. Fortunately no one was hurt. But
bad feelings had been roused, and at last it was found necessary to
close these stores altogether, with the result that the Eskimo have
been _obliged to leave_, and stay where they could buy provisions at
hand; and now the Eskimo are all gone, and the whole station is closed
for good. But this is only what civilization has done for aboriginal
races all the world over.

Thank God that in this case the Gospel both preceded and accompanied
commerce. To this alone I attribute the fact that after over 130
years any of the Eskimo do now remain. The Gospel has been received.
Many have passed from darkness to light, and so are in a position to
correspond to or resist the new environment of white men’s customs
and white men’s whisky. True the Eskimo in Labrador are being slowly
driven to a last stand. Thank God that stand is at Ramah, Hebron,
Okkak, Hopedale and Nain, around the devoted Christian missionaries of
the Moravian brethren, who for Christ’s sake spend their lives among
the hardships of this bleak and barren coast; and while Beothicks and
Red Indians have fallen victims to the God of mammon, remnants of this
gentle and harmless race still persist. Take away these Moravians from
Labrador, and the days of the Eskimo would soon be numbered.

[Illustration: Taken from an Eskimo Grave at Long Island.]

In the eleventh century Thorfinn Karlsefne describes the Skraellings
as “black and ill-favoured, with coarse hair on their heads, and large
eyes, with broad cheeks.” Cartwright, writing in 1790, says they were
quarrelsome among one another, and occasionally thievish. Cranz, in
1760, says they were degraded, immoral, and brutish in their heathen
state. Nansen thinks they led an ideal socialistic life, but founded, I
think, rather on a basis of inevitable union against starvation in bad
times than on a basis of Divine and brotherly love. They appear ever to
have been simple and confiding. Karlsefne says they came to visit his
men in Vinland and began to barter.

“These people would rather have red cloth than anything else; for this
they gave skins and real furs. For an entire fur-skin the Skraellings
took a piece of red cloth a span long, and bound it round their heads.
Thus went on traffic for a time, then the cloth began to fall short
among Karlsefne and his people, and they cut it asunder into small
pieces, which were not wider than the breadth of a finger, and still
the Skraellings gave just as much as before, and more.”

According to our code they are very immoral, yet seeing the conduct of
white men to one another and to themselves they always say of a good
man, “He is like an Innuit” (Eskimo). They themselves have no words for
cursing, and Nansen says also no words of opprobrium, such as liar,
scoundrel, or rowdy. Recently one in the far north of Labrador, who
already had seven wives, stole his son-in-law’s wife also—that is
his own daughter. The younger man bided his time, and then shot the
older one off his guard. Some twenty years ago a number came south to
the most northern Moravian station. One had cut on his gun-stock many
notches. On being asked what these meant, he explained they indicated
so many men craftily shot. On being told it was wrong, he promised not
to do it again. Polygamy is now done away with, and it is only in their
fishing-tents that different families sleep together. In some tents I
visited the only separations were marks made on the ground.

Yet they have learnt to repent of wrong-doing, and all their outbreaks
have ended in asking for forgiveness. They confess even murder to
the missionaries. I have met four who have done so. In all spiritual
matters they implicitly accept the Brethren’s teaching; nor do they
ever question the authority of the Bible; _e.g._, one man had a very
refractory boy, who was always annoying his teacher, and wilfully
disturbing the whole school. His father refused to punish him, for he
said he thought that must be wrong for a Christian. Nor would he alter
his decision till Solomon’s maxim on that point was shown him in black
and white. He then at once adopted Solomon’s view of the matter, and
“appealed to his son’s feelings” with a piece of walrus hide.

Other enemies, besides civilization, have helped to deplete the Eskimo
race. The early Vikings harried them on their visits to the coast.
Thorfinn Karlsefne mentions finding five Skraellings sleeping under
a boat. He adds, his men killed them; and similar incidents occurred
to others of these rovers. The Indians of the interior have always
been hostile to them, and in their battles with these the Eskimo have
generally come off second best.

We were shown the spot where tradition has it the Eskimo and
Montaignais Indians fought their last fight for mastery. A story to
which the finding of many stone arrow heads and knives lends some
colour. Off the mouth of a long river lies a large island, with a
smooth central plain, rising at each end to high broken rocks. On the
outer end clustered the humble huts of the Eskimos, with their fishing
gear lying around. One night, under cover of darkness, the Mountaineers
crept stealthily down the river in their large, double-ended, birch
war-canoes, and effected a landing, dragging the canoes up after them,
and then hiding themselves among the rocks. Next day, however, the
wary little Eskimo discovered their arrival, and pluckily determined
to attack them at once. It is easy to picture the wild scene that
followed. No doubt the little warriors fought desperately; but,
against their taller and more powerful adversaries, were at a great
disadvantage in a hand to hand conflict. Many having fallen in the
open, the remnant sought cover among the rocks at the outer end of
the island, only to be dislodged and driven back towards the sea.
Here, no doubt, the squaws—who still dress like men and partake in
all the expeditions—helped them to make one last stand for home and
children. Then came the skurry to the beach. Behind are the ruthless,
bloodthirsty “braves,” in front the mighty ocean. Picture the tiny
skin-boats, manned by the few survivors, darting out through Atlantic
surf, with probably wife and child hurriedly lashed on the back, as
they do sometimes at the present day. Think of the tragedies enacted,
as perhaps some obstacle prevented the kayaks getting away—some
refractory child, some accident to the frail craft at the last moment.
With fiendish yells the Indians are hurrying over the beach towards
them, more horrible from their weird war-paint. History only says the
settlement was exterminated.

Starvation also has lessened their numbers. Near Sir Leopold
McClintock’s winter quarters—where the darkness lasted for three
months—were camped some Eskimo. These people had neither fires nor
lights. Living in snow huts, into which they crawled on their bellies
through long snow tunnels, they lay huddled on one another for the sake
of the warmth. Their clothes were of duck-skins and other feathers
inside, and seal-skin outside. No wood existed anywhere near. Their
food consisted of raw seal meat, buried deep outside. Whenever hungry,
they would crawl out, eat about four pounds of raw meat, and crawl back
and sleep again as long as possible—almost hibernating like the black
bear. What would happen when the polar bear got at their meat supplies,
as he was only too likely to do?

Only this year (1894) the crew of the whaler _Balaena_ brought to
Dundee the horrible details of what might well be expected. The
_Balaena’s_ crew discovered on the shore, in a place far removed
from all animal life, the dead bodies of three Eskimos, and a number
of bleached human bones. These three—two men and one woman—were
evidently the last survivors of a larger party. Near to the bodies
three human heads were noticed—in each case the throat had been cut
and savagely hacked with a knife, while the brains had been extracted
through a hole in the skull. A smashed rifle and a bow and arrows were
lying near, and all the evidences of a severe struggle between the last
two male survivors. A blood-stained knife was taken from the woman’s
hand. It is probable the party had been waiting here (Elwin Bay) for
the arrival of the whalers in 1893. Alas! ice had prevented their
coming, and at last, among the patiently-expectant little people, an
awful tragedy had been enacted.

Less dramatic incidents also occur in Eskimo life. Thus, in one case
recently, an old tyrant had appropriated the fine new kayak of a poorer
man; and soon after this poor fellow was drowned while shooting deer
out of his old canoe, of which the skin covering was rotten. His son,
a young fellow under twenty, remained quiet a long time. One day,
however, he was taken out hunting by the old man. Whilst crossing
a wide river on the ice, the son dropped behind a step and blew the
other’s brains out.

On one or two occasions they have combined to attack the Moravian
Brethren. Thus in Hebron, on one occasion, they shut the missionaries
up in their house, not allowing them even to go and get water,
demanding that all the goods in the store should be handed over to
them. No resistance was made, except that the store was kept locked.
At the end of three days, which the Brethren had spent in prayer,
conviction seized the Eskimo, and they came and said they were very
sorry.

No stretch of imagination could call them an emotional people; some
are almost fatalists, and all are easily satisfied and careless of
the morrow. One day an Eskimo guide accompanied me out fishing. It
so happened that rain fell in great quantities, and as he had left
his skin “kossack,” or jumper, at home, he might reasonably have been
expected to seek shelter under one of the many rocks while I fished.
Not so. He remained seated all the time out in the rain as if he were a
mushroom. Late at night, after he had gone home, he came off again in
his “kayak” to the ship to see me. “My boy dead,” he said. “Why did you
not tell me he was ill? You knew we had medicine.” “No good; must die,”
he replied.

I went next morning to see the funeral. The Moravians have taught them
to bury beneath the surface. A hole had been dug in the sandy ground;
the body was put in, and the grave filled up with sand. An hour later
not a sign remained to mark the spot. It would never suggest itself to
them to visit it.

In 1790, Cartwright, falling in love with an Eskimo girl, asked
her hand from her husband Eketcheak, who had another wife himself.
The reply was, “She is no good to work. Have this one and her two
children.” Cartwright declined, saying he preferred the younger. “Take
them all then,” said the generous husband. Cartwright explained he did
not wish to trespass too much on his kindness. “Oh, you can give them
back at the end of the year if you don’t want to keep them.”

While we were in Okkak, an elderly squaw came to be treated for shaking
of the knees. It appeared that she had never before seen a steamboat,
and had received a severe fright at the arrival of the _Princess May_;
for she thought it was a man-of-war come to punish her son Rudolph,
who some time previously had shot his wife, being tired of her. Since
that incident Rudolph had become a Christian, but, as his crime was
still unpunished, by Moravian rule he could not be admitted to their
communion.

Remorse seemed to have seized him, and his one desire now was that his
crime might be expiated by receiving its punishment at the hand of man.
Naturally his mother was anxious.

This lack of emotion seems to prevent a due appreciation of the
principle of self-sacrifice. Thus, one day, while a heavy storm
was raging, some of those ashore noticed a party in great distress,
endeavouring to reach the mainland in one of their smaller boats. A
heavy surf was rolling in, and it would no doubt have been risky to go
out. So the idea of a rescue seems never to have suggested itself. The
people were drowned, and in telling the story themselves afterwards,
they said, shrugging their shoulders, “Kujana,” meaning, “It must
be,” or “I don’t care for it”—a solution which to them is perfectly
satisfactory.

Yet they do at times brave deeds. Once last winter Michael and Simeon
(they never have two names) in crossing from an island in their kayaks,
were overtaken by a kind of blizzard. Simeon became unconscious and
capsized. Michael, though himself almost _in extremis_, and having only
his tiny kayak to fight the storm in, managed to get his friend out of
the boat—into which they are usually laced—to put him on the back
of his own canoe, and to carry him safely to land. Needless to say no
Albert medal rewarded his brave deed. Unfortunately, the art of using
the kayak is rapidly becoming lost, largely because the foolish Eskimo
part with the seal-skins, necessary to cover their boats, in exchange
for cheap and useless European goods. At one time, with their skin
kossack or coat, laced over the opening, and fast round their wrists
and face, they could upset with impunity, for with a couple of deft
strokes with their paddles they were soon right way up again. Indeed,
in heavy seas they would purposely upset, and so get the force of the
broken water on the bottom or side of their boat, righting themselves
immediately the danger had passed. In sport one kayak would “leap-frog”
over another; or turning over on one side the “kayak man” would right
himself on the other in their merry dexterity. Alas! that so marvellous
an adaptation to the necessities of their lives should ever be
relegated to a forgotten past. Broken water does them no more harm than
it would to a swimming seagull, so exquisite is their buoyancy.

Generosity and vanity form a queer combination in many of them. On
one occasion, a family, which had long been struggling for the mere
necessaries of daily life, were fortunate enough to catch in their
large stone trap a black fox. With tears of joy the father took the
skin to the store. God had heard his prayers. He was credited with £9
worth of goods. When he got home, however, the well-filled cupboard
so filled his heart with vanity that he issued an invitation to all
his acquaintances “to come and eat and stay with him.” In two days the
supplies ran out, and already again the wolf of hunger besieged his
doors.

In another case a Newfoundland planter had left an Eskimo in charge
of his stores during the winter, giving him for himself a more than
generous winter’s diet. Soon his friends, with their chronic state of
hunger, came to pay him a visit. Without a thought as to consequences,
the visit was prolonged indefinitely, and soon the whole of them
were without provisions. The usual course to adopt next is to drive
on and visit the nearest settlement, till all alike are “commercial
travellers” in the same line of business. No wonder there is an Eskimo
saying, “Do not live near the komatik (or sleigh) track.”

Loyalty is said to be a marked feature in the Eskimo. They fully
believed at Hopedale that Her Majesty the Queen sits on a rock on the
look-out—as they do—in her anxiety for the arrival of the mission
ship _Harmony_. We were charged with many personal messages by them to
the Queen, expressing their deep sense of gratitude for sending the
_Albert_ out to them.

When they heard the English were at war in Egypt, they organized an
impromptu regiment, with a captain in a discarded policeman’s coat and
one odd epaulet, with which they proposed to the missionaries they
should proceed to the seat of war. Indeed, they took no denial, and
continued to drill till the opening of the sea turned their attention
once more to cod-fishing.

I must now close my few remarks about this interesting people. Some of
their habits, which to us are more repellant, I have purposely passed
over—such as their predilection for their meat to be “mikkiak,” or
partly rotten, and their uncleanliness. What we saw of the Eskimo we
liked: their gratitude for kindnesses done; their fortitude under
the knife, or in pain; their merriment and good-nature often under
circumstances most depressing. When talking to a dying Eskimo of
forty-five, who for a fortnight had lain in terrible agony with his
hands blown off, I asked the poor fellow if the pain was unbearable. He
answered simply, “It is nothing to what my Saviour bore in the Garden
for me.” His last words were singing Zinzendorf’s beautiful hymn:—

    “Jesus, day by day,
    Guide us on our way.”

It continues:—

        “Should the path us grieve,
        Thee we’ll never leave;
    Lord, in days of greatest sadness,
    Let us bear our cross with gladness;
        Trials mark the road
        Leading home to God.

        All our steps attend,
        Guide us to the end;
    Should the way be rough and dreary,
    With Thy strength support the weary;
        When our race is o’er,
        Open, Lord, Thy door.”




CHAPTER XVI

_THE DEEDS OF HEROES_


Some 18,000 people cluster around the shores of Trinity Bay, their
scattered villages and fishing hamlets nestling on its creeks and
coves. It was in February. The Ice King had laid his iron hand even
on the giant ocean, and the floe ice of the frozen sea stretched far
beyond the eye’s horizon. Yet these boldest among England’s sea-loving
sons were adding to their scanty stock of this world’s goods by
venturing far out among the treacherous ice in pursuit of seals.

The morning of the 27th broke bright and beautiful, enhanced by a
clear space of deep blue water between the shore and the inner edge
of the ice. The eager hunters were early astir, and snatching a hasty
breakfast, were soon off in their little boats, being but lightly clad,
to give their limbs freer play in the various vicissitudes of their
calling.

From Trinity, Green Bay, Ireland’s Eye, boat glided out after boat,
as the crack of the guns of those first afloat told of a prospect of
success, until over 220 men were out. “’Tis a strange and awful thing
to think, how often mortality stands on the brink of its grave without
any misgiving.”

Suddenly a dark cloud appeared in the north-east, with incredible
rapidity masses piled themselves together, and then in a moment,
from the heart of the black battalions, the tempest leaped in fury,
struck the now darkened waters, and converted the bay into a seething,
hissing cauldron. The temperature fell forty degrees, and the fierce
cold, with the piercing wind, seemed to freeze the very blood in the
veins. Gust followed gust, each more furious than the last, driving the
angry sea in foam-capped mountains on to the doomed fleet of boats.
Now began a desperate struggle for life, enough to appal the stoutest
hearts. Two alternatives only were possible—first to face the teeth
of the gale and row for their homes on the north shore; or, secondly,
run before it, and endeavour to clamber over the ice to the southern
side of the bay. Six boats tried the former. The spray, freezing as
it fell, drenched the men to their skin, covering both boats and men
with casings of solid ice. Slowly and painfully, in terrible danger
each moment of being swamped, they lessened the distance between
themselves and the shore. Suddenly a cry of despair arose from one of
the boats—the oars had snapped, and the boat was drifting to certain
destruction. Without a thought of the peril of the delay, and from the
increased burden they would have to carry, the nearest boat at once
went to their aid, and in that terrible sea took the perishing men on
board. One of the poor fellows, however, was soon dead from cold and
exhaustion. Ice began to form in thick masses on the bow and sides of
the deeply-laden boat, and as each wave struck her she rose more and
more heavily, until all saw the immediate need of lightening the boat.
With sad, mute faces the men looked at each other. The dead man lay at
the bottom of the boat, his white face and unclosed eyes turned towards
the sky. “Come, boys,” said the oldest man, “it can’t be helped; Isaac
must go overboard or we shall all be drowned.” Rapidly they raised the
body, now draped in its icy shroud. “In the name of God we commit this
body to the deep in sure, and certain hope of resurrection. Amen.” A
dull plash and the reverent funeral service was over. The boat seemed
now to float more buoyantly; but after another hour’s struggle for
life, the brother of him whose remains had already been given to the
sea, breathed his last. No doubt the horror of the scene had hastened
his end. The sad ceremonial had to be repeated at once, for the ice was
fast gaining and sinking the boat.

Benumbed and exhausted in this death battle, all hope was nearly over
when from the foremost boat a cry was raised which put fresh courage
in their hearts—Land, ho! It was the well known “Horse Chop” rocks.
Another desperate effort, and at last their keels touched the strand.
But, alas! for the poor fellows even then. Some, unable even to leave
the boats till helped by their companions, staggered feebly ashore,
and tried to crawl up the steep gulch from their landing place; but
strength failed them, and four more died after landing. It was a sad
ending to so brave a fight.

Deeds worthy of the highest praise were enacted in that gulch that
day, the stronger helping the weaker, and endeavouring to restore and
encourage those who were abandoning themselves to death. One tells
how “I saw Robert Bannister manage to crawl partly up the cliff on
his hands and knees. At last he just stopped, said, ‘God bless us,’
and died where he was. His son was lying dead near him.” The nearest
house was two miles away, but three men had now spied them. Hastily
making a fire of brushwood, they helped the still living up the cliff,
and putting some of their own garments on them, nursed some back to
life—but here two more poor fellows perished, while their rescuers
carried or helped them over that long two miles. Not one but suffered
terribly from frost-bite, especially one poor fellow who had given his
mittens to a lad without any.

There were still twenty-four boats missing. What of them? Ice-covered,
frost-bitten, and exhausted, some had reached harbours in the great
bay, situated not so directly in the teeth of the storm; but of those
who made for Bonaventure, Deer Harbour, Thoroughfare, and Ireland’s
Eye, only one had died in the boat. But now deeds of even greater
heroism were called for and performed. The men from Ireland’s Eye
found that far out in the storm were men from English Harbour and
Salmon Cove, who could not possibly reach home, and who might be
sheltering on some off-lying uninhabited island, certain to perish
during the night unless help were forthcoming. Food was partaken of,
a brief rest snatched, God’s protecting care besought, and once more
these heroes of the sea went out silently into that raging storm, from
which they had but just escaped with their lives. “Inasmuch as ye did
unto the least of these, My brethren, ye did it unto Me.” Two boats
were manned, and after fruitless search one returned safely, but empty
handed, to the shelter of the harbour. The other, through the darkness
of the falling night, saw at length a small light on a desolate spot
near Thoroughfare. Fierce joy burnt in those noble hearts, as they
strained every sinew to drive their stubborn craft through the now
almost forgotten dangers. Alas, a sorrowful sight awaited them. There
in their boat on the beach, amidst the roar of the storm, and the
thunder of the surf, lay two poor fellows silent in death—swathed
in their winding sheet of ice, and fast frozen to their boat. By the
fire were three fishermen, half dead themselves, trying to rekindle
the spark of life in two of their fast dying comrades. All were taken
back by the rescue party, and the living nursed back to life at the
nearest cottage. It was enough to move the most cynical to tears—wives
and mothers wildly wringing their hands in agony of heart; and those
strong men, with nerves of iron, wept like children.

The storm raged all Saturday night, and from many a little home the men
were still missing. During the long hours hope and despair alternated
in many anxious hearts, for all knew they had drifted across the bay,
and none knew what their fate might be.

At noon on Sunday a woman, at Heart’s Content, on the southern
side, happened to notice, far out in the bay, a small boat drifting
helplessly about. But for this all must have perished. Rescue parties
were at once formed, and soon five boats, with seventeen men, some in
the last stage of exhaustion from the exposure of that awful night,
were brought ashore. These men had spent the night on the ice; they
had broken up and burnt two boats, which, with the fat of two seals
they had killed, had kept off the worst of the cold, while some of the
fresh meat, roasted in the flames, had helped to assuage the pangs
of hunger and maintain the bodily heat. All these were more or less
severely frost-bitten, but, with the loss of fingers, toes, or heels,
all recovered. Later in the day the rest of the boats were seen, and
twenty-seven more men rescued. One of these men, Patrick Hanlan, thus
described his experiences:—

“The spray was continually going over us, and freezing, and we soon
saw it was impossible to reach land on the north side of the bay
without running the risk of freezing to death. After a time we gave
her a little sheet, and ran her for a pan of ice. Got out on the pan
and made a fire to get something to eat and drink. Just as we were
doing this, a sea broke over the pan, and washed everything off except
ourselves. We had to jump in our boat and run her before the gale
until about four in the afternoon. Just before dusk we caught up four
other boats with twelve men in them. We all hauled up our boats on a
large pan of ice, turned up the largest boats to make a shelter from
the wind, and made a fire. I had two seals in my boat, and we pelted
(_i.e._ skinned) them to burn the fat, breaking up one of the smaller
boats, also, to use as fuel. We were on the ice drifting up the bay
all night. It was bitterly cold, in spite of the big fire, and we had
to keep dancing and jumping to keep up our spirits, and to keep from
freezing. At dawn we were about five miles from Heart’s Delight. We
hauled our boats over some ice, and then rowed for land, which we
reached at nine o’clock. The people treated us with wonderful kindness,
doing all in their power to relieve us. Under Providence they saved our
lives, and we shall never forget their kindness.”[18]

[Footnote 18: For the above account of this Trinity Bay disaster I am
indebted to the Rev. Dr. Moses Harvey, LL.D., F.R.C.S., one of the
truest friends the fishermen ever had.—W. T. G.]

Enough has been said to show the stuff these men are made of, and there
is not space here to multiply stories that point to the same traits
of character, and that show the same self-sacrificing courage. Yet
with such the history of these perilous fisheries abounds. With which
statement of fact, gentle reader, I shall say adieu, thanking God if in
any way I may still be of service to these toilers of the sea.




CHAPTER XVII

_WE APPEAL FOR CANADIAN SYMPATHY_


[Illustration: A Missionary in Winter Dress.]

In November, 1893, Dr. Bobardt and myself visited Canada, with the
hope of getting help for our work, seeing that some Canadians would
at least benefit by it. In Halifax, Montreal, Ottawa, and Toronto we
found friendly audiences. St. Paul’s Church (Episcopal), the Brunswick
Street Methodist Church, and the Garison Chapel, all of Halifax, each
paid for the support of one cot for a year, promising to endeavour to
do so annually; while a small committee was organized in each place
to keep alive an interest in the work, and to help by sending clothes
and reading to St. Johns, Newfoundland, for us to carry to Labrador.
Governor Daly, General Montgomery Moore, and Bishop Courtney, of Nova
Scotia, were good enough to assist us in Halifax; while everywhere
the members of that admirable institution, “The Brotherhood of St.
Andrew,” extended their generous friendship to us. In Montreal, Sir
Donald Smith, Governor of the Hudson Bay Company, who himself had spent
thirteen years in charge of one of the Company’s stations, presented
a steamer to the Montreal Committee, to enable the work to be more
efficiently carried out. Dr. Roddick, of Montreal, also presented the
Mission with a sailing boat for Battle Harbour, called the _Urelia
McKinnon_. His Excellency the Governor-General, Lord Aberdeen, was
good enough to preside at the meeting at Ottawa, and express his
sympathy with the work. Indeed, for real interest and sympathy in every
philanthropic work, and it is grand to know in every distinctively
missionary work also, Canada is fortunate in possessing in both Lord
and Lady Aberdeen examples of a kind alas far too rare in these
so-called Christian days. A meeting was also held in Winnipeg, whither
we went on a holiday trip, and here the Lieut.-Governor, Sir John
Schultze, presided, and, with Lady Schultze, expressed great interest
in the work. Samuel Blake, Esq., Q.C., so well known in Canada for his
broad-minded Christian sympathies, was our chairman at Toronto. Our
days at Toronto possessed for me an interest never experienced before.
We fell on a great Missionary Convention, and from Mr. Warzawiak, of
New York, Dr. MacKay, of Formosa, Dr. Gordon, of Boston, Dr. Pierson,
of Philadelphia, and many other remarkable men, we heard of such
difficulties overcome, obstacles removed, and successes attained by the
Gospel in other fields in the missionary world, that it made one desire
to be at work in China, Africa, and North America all at once.

Reaching England in March, while preparations were being made for 1894,
I was enabled to visit the North Sea fleets. The English fishermen
expressed a most lively interest in their brethren over the sea, and
the warm-hearted admiral of the Red Cross fleet sent me a large flag,
that they might be “represented in Labrador.”

Dr. Curwen having gone to China for the London Missionary Society, and
Dr. Bobardt desiring to remain at home a year, our staff, consisting
of Dr. Willway, Dr. Bennett, and the two sisters, sailed direct for
Labrador in the _Albert_, while a volunteer Christian worker, who came
and acted as chief engineer (Mr. W. B. Wakefield), and myself, left for
Montreal, fitting out and despatching the S.S. _Princess May_, as we
passed through St. Johns, Newfoundland.

The _Albert_ had a long passage out, and meeting the outside of the
floe ice, had a tough three days working her way through; now charging
into large pans, now laying against masses piled up higher than her
masts. Captain Trezise reported her as at one time in great danger of
being overwhelmed by masses falling on to her decks. She, however,
got through safely, and her magnificent sea qualities and rapid
movements were more than ever before apparent to those in charge of her.

[Illustration: Eskimo Brass Band at Moravian Mission Station of
Hopedale.]

Having landed Dr. Bennett and Sister Carwardine at Battle Hospital,
she proceeded to Indian Harbour, where the hospital was rapidly placed
in working order. Here the little wood building almost came to an
inglorious and premature end by fire the first week of its existence;
and we were indebted to the strenuous efforts of a number of fishermen
for saving it from destruction, and to Commodore Curzon-Howe, of H.M.S.
_Cleopatra_, for landing a body of blue jackets to repair the damage,
enabling the work to proceed. The _Albert_ then returned and lay in
Battle Harbour, to await the arrival of our steamer, the _Sir Donald_.
Meanwhile, we had visited many stations from Montreal along the
Labrador coast on the north side the Gulf of St. Lawrence. Everywhere
we had had plenty of work to do: seeing sick people, operating
where necessary, holding services, and distributing literature. We
_everywhere_ found people deeply grateful for our visit, and glad to
gather to hear the Gospel. Many spoke eagerly of the hopes raised that
a third hospital would be erected in the Labrador or lower province of
Quebec, to which the sick could be carried, and were anxious to forward
a petition to Ottawa to that effect. We were everywhere entreated not
to allow this to be our last visit. At La Romaine, a station of the
Hudson Bay Company, we had a severe operation on a young Montaignais
Indian hunter—otherwise doomed to die—and when we left three days
later he was lying in his tent, on a clean bed of spruce boughs, on the
high-road to recovery. At the last places we visited, we took patients
aboard for Battle Hospital—one poor lad with a horrible affection of
the hip, a girl with a useless wrist and arm, a child with hip-joint
disease, and a sick woman for operation. All of these eventually
returned home benefited or cured.

Just before reaching Battle Harbour, with all our flags flying, our
brass polished, and our spirits wild with expectancy of seeing our
colleagues again, we suddenly struck a submerged rock, and for a few
minutes lay in danger of rolling over and sinking in deep water. All
hands behaved exceedingly well. Our boats were lowered, signals put
up for two schooners which happened to be passing, to “stand by,”
while kedge anchors were run out, in the endeavour to save the ship
by warping her off the rocks. After a time, assisted by a heavy tide
and the big ground swell, she came off and swung to her anchors in
the deep water. Alas, for us, she had almost better have remained a
complete wreck, for her keel and stem were broken, her rudder twisted,
her propeller gone, her engines broken, and her side bulged in.
Fortunately, we were able to travel over land to Battle Harbour; and
Mr. Baine Grieve’s agent sent thence his bait launch and towed the
_Sir Donald_ into harbour. Here we found the _Albert_, very anxious
about our long delayed arrival, but now overjoyed to see us in any
plight. As nothing could be done to repair the steamer in Labrador,
Captain Trezise undertook the exceedingly risky attempt to tow the _Sir
Donald_ to St. Johns, and this, after many exciting incidents and many
close shaves of losing her, he successfully accomplished. There she now
lies, undergoing repairs for another year’s work.

Meanwhile, I left with the _Urelia McKinnon_ for Indian Harbour
Hospital, and thence visited the Hudson Bay station at Rigolette, and
many other places between Indian Harbour and Battle.

Dr. Bennett was anxious to leave early for England, as he was appointed
by the London Missionary Society to Tien-Tsin Missionary Hospital in
China; and so, till winter drove the Newfoundland people off the coast,
Battle Hospital came under my charge. On November 1st the sisters and
myself left for Newfoundland, Dr. Willway remaining to hold the fort
alone till we could return in 1895. His arrangements were to visit, if
possible, as far as Blanc Sablon, and then returning to his hospital to
meet our good friend Mr. Wilson, of Rigolette, at Cartwright, to travel
with him north to Hopedale and Davis Inlet, and then to await at Battle
Hospital our return.

Thus, God willing, much good will be done, many sick and suffering
ones relieved, many cheered and assisted in their struggle for
existence, and, above all, the Gospel proclaimed in many homes where,
but for the “Labrador Mission,” its sound would never reach during the
long and weary winter months.[19]

[Footnote 19: Dr. Willway left for the North on January 9th, the sea
being then firmly frozen over.]




APPENDICES


APPENDIX A

_SOME MEDICAL STATISTICS._


There were treated from the _Albert_ in 1892 nine hundred patients, of
which one-third might be called serious cases. An epidemic of influenza
visited the coast, and this led to many cases of lung affections.
Affections of the eyes were also common, while minor surgical cases
were in great abundance. Seven operations were performed under
anæsthetics.

In 1893 there were treated:—

In Labrador, the Straits of Belle Isle, and on the French shore of
Newfoundland there were treated by—

                                               In-Patients. Out-Patients.

  Dr. Bobardt at Battle Hospital                   33            647
  Dr. Curwen on the Hospital ship _Albert_          3          1,052
  Dr. Grenfell on the steam launch _Princess May_   1            794
                                                   ——          —————
             That is a total of                    37          2,493


These cases, for the council’s better information and that of the
public, I analysed as follows. [Our case books are preserved in London
for reference.]


_Medical Cases._

  Diseases of—
     Digestive system                            633
     Respiratory and circulatory system          194
     Nervous system                               60
     Excretory system                             40
     Women                                        64
  Diseases of special organs—
     Eye (including 34 cases of night blindness) 211
     Ear                                          40
     Nose and throat                              93
     Skin                                        105
  Minor cases—Headaches, colds, strains          167
  Cases of rheumatism                             64


_Surgical Cases._

  Affections of the upper limbs                  306
  Affections of the lower limbs                   94
  General surgical cases—Glands, bones, special
    agues, rickets, tumour, fistula, etc.        188
  Sundry minor cases                             210
                                                ————
                                    Total      2,493

  Operations performed under chloroform           17
  Major operations without chloroform             11
  Minor surgical operations, including teeth     269

There were in Battle Harbour Hospital the following named cots or beds:
viz., Exeter, Brighton, Redhill, Hutchinson, Macpherson; also the John
Fountain Elvin and John Charles Harris memorial cots.

In the male ward were first the “Brighton cot.” This was occupied by a
poor Newfoundland fisherman whom I brought 80 miles in the _Princess
May_. He had consumption, and died after about two months in hospital.
His body alone reached his relatives in Newfoundland.

The second bed was the “Harris Cot.” There were three patients in this
bed this season. The first was suffering with pleurisy; the second had
to have his middle finger amputated, after a deep abscess of the hand;
the third also had a severely poisoned hand.

The third, the “Redhill Cot,” was occupied by a fisherman with
paralysis of the right arm and leg, and then by a poor fellow with
consumption.

The fourth, the “Hutchinson Cot,” was occupied by, first, a man with
a severely crushed hand; then by a poor fellow from far north, sent
back by the _Albert_ (he was suffering from ulcer of the stomach); and,
thirdly, by a French Canadian who was brought in a sealing steamer from
Canadian Labrador, with a deep abscess of the back.

The fifth, the “Exeter Cot,” was occupied, first, by a fisherman with
rheumatic fever and heart disease; second, by a man with excessive deep
inflammation of the arm and forearm; third, by a man with abscess in
the palm of his hand; fourth, by a young American with an affection
resulting from consumption in the system; fifth, by a very similar case
with a Newfoundlander.

The sixth, the “Macpherson Cot,” was in the female ward. First of all
it was occupied by a young girl who had to undergo a serious operation;
then by a woman who had come fifty miles down the Straits of Belle
Isle with an internal disease; then by a poor girl brought south in the
mail steamer from the cabin of one of the small fishing vessels. She
died in hospital. The poor thing was engaged to be married this summer.
Had she been able to come earlier for proper assistance there can be
no doubt her life would have been saved. The fourth patient in this
bed was a girl of eighteen. She had been suffering with an internal
abscess for nearly three years when I saw her first in Sandwich Bay
in the _Princess May_. After the operation we sent her by the mail to
Battle Hospital. Here she remained some weeks, and on returning south
in the _Princess May_, and again visiting Sandwich Bay, I found the
girl returned, a new creature altogether. “I should like to have stayed
always,” she told me.

  W. T. G.


 _The following are a few figures from my report rendered to the St.
 Johns Auxiliary Branch of the M.D.S.F._:—

In 1894, owing to the loss of the S.S. _Sir Donald_, and the fact
of the _Princess May_ being unable to reach the coast, the work of
the mission was much curtailed. Yet out of 1,306 patients treated a
much larger proportion were serious cases, and more patients availed
themselves of the hospitals. This number will no doubt increase.

There were treated this year by—

                                   In-Patients. Out-Patients.
  Dr. Bennett at Battle Hospital        27           444
  Dr. Willway at Indian Harbour         20           580
  Dr. Grenfell on the _Sir Donald_ and
    _Urelia McKinnon_                    4           231
                                        ——         —————
                              Total     51         1,255

These were—
              _Medical Cases._

  Diseases of—
      Digestive system                  226
      Respiratory system                130
      Nervous system                     55
      Excretory system                   45
      Women                              33
  Minor cases—Colds, headaches           73

              _Surgical Cases._
  Diseases of—

  Affections of the upper limbs          73
  Affections of the lower limbs          64
  General surgical affections, including
    glands, bones, fistula, etc.        140
  Minor surgery cases                   114
  Diseases of special organs—
      Eye                                90
      Ear                                27
      Nose and throat                    48
      Skin                               74
      Affection                          64
  Operations performed under anæsthetics 25
  Minor operations, including teeth     119
  In-patients                            51
                                      —————
            Grand total               1,306


APPENDIX B

_SPIRITUAL AGENCIES IN LABRADOR_,

SINCE JULY, 1892, AT WHICH TIME WE ARRIVED ON THE COAST.


There is a Wesleyan missionary fifty miles west of Battle, at Red Bay.
To visit all round his circuit and return must involve 250 to 300
miles’ travelling. It must be remembered all this visiting is done in
a small open boat in summer, at great risk in so dangerous a place as
the Straits of Belle Isle; and in winter over the ice with a komatik
and team of dogs. The Rev. J. Sidey was there three years, and is now
replaced by Rev. J. Antle.[20]

[Footnote 20: These Wesleyan missionaries are supported by the
Methodist Church of Canada.]

At Battle Harbour, as is well known to our readers, there is a wooden
church, but it has been in charge of a young teacher and lay reader
since we have been on the coast.

At Cartwright, thirty miles up Sandwich Bay, is another wooden church
and schoolroom combined. Here also is a lay reader and schoolmaster.
This would be about 150 miles up the coast from Battle Harbour. The
sphere of work does not, I think, extend at all outside Sandwich Bay.

Fifty miles above Indian Harbour, up Hamilton Inlet, is a young
Wesleyan minister. He has a small school and chapel on the south side
of the inlet. We had the pleasure of taking him in the _Princess May_
to his new sphere of work. His name is the Rev. G. Hollett, and his
sphere of work is Hamilton Inlet, I think as far in as the North West
river, that is eighty miles further, or 130 from Indian Harbour.

From Indian Harbour to Hopedale the settlers number from 260 to 300,
and are very poor and very scattered. The distance by sea is 150 miles,
and again consists of a series of long bays and off-lying islands.
There is no missionary or schoolmaster anywhere along this part of
the coast, though once in the winter one of the Moravians travels over
the ice as far south as Cape Harrison with his komatik and dogs, often
at great peril to his life. Northward of Cape Harrison are only a few
scattered European settlers, mixed among not less than 2,000 Eskimos.
These are mostly members of the Moravian Church. The Moravian stations
are from 50 to 100 miles apart.

To meet the spiritual needs of all these people, scattered as they are,
and of the 25,000 who visit the coast in summer—some 10,000 living
on their vessels all the year—we only heard of one clergyman of the
Church of England and one Wesleyan minister, with one Roman Catholic
priest, visiting during part of the summer. This year, 1893, we did
not hear of any peripatetic Wesleyan minister, and the only clergyman
was rather in pursuit of health; but we met in the Straits of Belle
Isle Bishop MacDonnel and the Rev. Father Lynch, of the Roman Catholic
Church. I must mention also that the Bible Society send a colporteur
every year to sell Bibles and testaments on the coast, though we did
not fall in with him this year, nor do I know how much of the coast he
travels over. Last year a tiny schooner, manned by three Salvation Army
captains, also visited the coast, partly fishing and partly preaching
the gospel. Among the fishermen themselves we met many earnest and
pious Christians, and as on the North Sea, so on this bleak coast we
have felt God’s presence quite as real and as near in the meetings on
board or in the huts as we have in great buildings and comfortable pews
in the old country.

Among past workers in Labrador I hear of the Rev. J. G. Curling, Rev.
Mr. Hutchinson, and Rev. Mr. Quintain. The last two spent many years in
Labrador, while the Rev. J. Bull spent three years at Battle Harbour.
The Right Rev. Llewellyn Jones, Bishop of Newfoundland and Bermuda,
has also visited the coast, as did Bishop Field, his predecessor. The
Rev. Father Lemoine, labouring among the Montaignais Indians of the
interior, also sometimes comes out on the coast during the summer.[21]

[Footnote 21: Bishop Jones sent three visiting clergymen to Labrador
this summer 1894.]


APPENDIX C

_A FEW TESTIMONIES TO THE WORK FROM THOSE WHO KNOW LABRADOR_


  _From the_ REV. F. S. HOLLETT, _Missionary of the
  Canadian Methodist Church at Rigolette_:—

  HAMILTON INLET,
  LABRADOR.

  DEAR DR. GRENFELL,—

... Any way that we can help you, we will be glad to do it. As you know
I can sympathise with you in the difficulties you meet with. D.V., we
hope to have a visit from you next year. May God bless you in your
noble work, and you will always remember,

  I am
  Your sincere brother in Christ,
  FRANK S. HOLLETT.

       *       *       *       *       *

_From_ DR. ROBERT MURRAY, _Editor of the “Presbyterian Witness”_:—

  HALIFAX,
  _December, 1894_.

  DEAR DR. GRENFELL,—

 ... From our Presbyterian teacher from Canadian Labrador we had most
 favourable reports of your work. I examined him personally on his
 return, as to what he had seen and heard.

 While he had not seen the hospitals and the doctors, he had heard most
 appreciative reports from fishermen ...

  Yours very truly,
  ROBERT MURRAY.

       *       *       *       *       *

_October 27, 1892._ A representative meeting of the colony of
Newfoundland was held at Government House, St. Johns. There were
present, amongst others, His Excellency the Governor, Sir Frederick
Carter (Judge of Supreme Court), Sir William Whiteway (Premier),
Major-General Dowell, R.A., Sir Robert Thorburn (late Premier), Hon. E.
D. Shea, Hon. Robert Bond (Colonial Secretary), Hon. A. Goodridge (late
Premier), Hon. A. W. Harvey, Hon. M. Munroe, and Messrs. W. Grieve, P.
Tessier, E. Duder, W. Job, E. Outerbridge, representing the merchant
firms, Captains the Hon. S. Blandford, W. Bartlett, N. Fitzgerald, J.
Watson, representing the Labrador planters, and Messrs. Ch. Emerson,
J. Withers,—Cohen, etc. After a discussion, in which several present
took part, it was proposed by Hon. W. A. Harvey, seconded by Sir Wm.
Whiteway, and when put by His Excellency the Governor unanimously
resolved:—

_Resolved._—“That this meeting, representing the principal merchants
and traders carrying on the fisheries, especially on the coast of
Labrador, and others interested in the welfare of this colony, desires
to tender its warmest thanks to the directors of the Deep Sea Mission
for their philanthropic generosity in sending their hospital ship
_Albert_ to visit the fishing settlements on the Labrador coast.

“Much of our fishing industry is carried on in regions beyond the
ordinary reach of medical aid or of charity, and it is with the
deepest sense of gratitude that this meeting learns of the amount of
medical and surgical work done, besides all the other relief and help
so liberally distributed. This meeting also desires to express the
hope that the directors of the Mission may see their way to continue
the work thus begun, and should they do so they may be assured of the
earnest support and co-operation of all classes of this community.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Subsequent to this great meeting the following resolution was passed
and forwarded to the Mission:—

 “That this representative committee will undertake to provide two
 suitable buildings, which may be used as hospitals by the Mission to
 Deep Sea Fishermen, should the Council of the Mission signify their
 intention to continue their operations on the coast of Labrador, and
 the Committee will heartily co-operate in any other way that the
 Council of the Society may suggest.

 “That a copy of the foregoing resolution be forwarded for the
 information of the society.

  (Signed) {T. O’BRIEN, Governor, _Chairman_.
           {M. MUNROE, _Secretary_.”

  MONTREAL, _December, 1893_.

A. BOBARDT, Esq., M.B., R.N., writing, says:—

       *       *       *       *       *

Often in Labrador have I been urged on to further work by noting how
much a Mission visit is appreciated, and how the people do enjoy a
meeting; and it seems a thousand pities that they cannot be brought
under regular spiritual influences.

       *       *       *       *       *

The small portable organ I had was most useful, and wherever I went it
was my _Fidus Achates_, tending to infuse more life into my meetings.
I found the people joined heartily in the hymns. Most of this visiting
was done by boat, and it was in this work that one recognised fully the
benefits of being able to handle an oar, and pull oneself wherever one
wished to go.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the hospital I had thirty-three in-patients, and in the nursing of
these I must pay tribute to Nurse Carwardine, who, by her unremitting
zeal and attention, made many of these poor fishermen know for the
first time what it was to be in a comfortable warm bed, and be
skilfully attended to.

       *       *       *       *       *

The comparison between them in hospital and in their own homes or
smacks is too extreme to be drawn, and they were very grateful for what
had been done for them.

One case for example:—A gunshot wound of the hand came to hospital,
and, though his hand was severely lacerated, he was able to return to
his home with a useful limb, after being five weeks in. If this case
had been left to itself, the young man must have either lost his arm,
or had a stiff and useless hand; and the latter is in the way of a
fisherman, who necessarily uses his hands so much in handling nets,
lines, ropes, oars, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many at Battle and the surrounding coves are now thanking God for
His goodness in inspiring friends in England and elsewhere to send
clothing for them this fall; the look of delight when they received
their bundles was a treat to witness. On Tuesday, October 31st, we left
Battle Harbour, amidst the salutes from many “Brown Sallys” (guns).
We carried with us the pleasantest recollections, and the hope that
the work would grow and increase, bringing health, happiness, and much
comfort to these Labradorites.

  Sincerely yours,
  ALBERT BOBARDT.

       *       *       *       *       *

_From_ Rev. JNO. SIDEY, _now three years Wesleyan Missionary at Red
Bay_.

  _November, 1892._

 At the present time I believe there are but two ministers of the
 Gospel between Hopedale, the Moravian settlement, and Blanc Sablon,
 in the Straits of Belle Isle, a distance of over four hundred miles.
 Around the coast line numerous settlements are scattered along the
 route, and here in the best harbours are congregated during the
 summer season thousands of fishermen from Newfoundland, Canada, and
 the United States. They may, perhaps, the greater part of them, be
 attendants at the various churches when at home; but out here, removed
 from all religious influences, what wonder that they become dissipated
 and lost in the spiritual darkness that abounds on the coast. The
 Mission ship has visited these harbours, held services, and, if one
 may take as a criterion the work done here, and the interest aroused,
 a very favourable aspect is presented as to the spiritual portion of
 the work.

 But another and equally important phase of the work of the Mission
 on these shores calls for the earnest sympathy and encouragement of
 all who have interest in this noble enterprise—THE MEDICAL WORK. A
 doctor is provided by the Government for this shore, during the summer
 months, but as he is stationed on board the mail-boat, which only
 calls just to land the mails and freight at comparatively a few of
 the above-mentioned ports, his services are practically _nil_ to the
 greater portion of the community. Yet the record of sick and disabled
 fishermen is very large. Many have, year by year, to be sent home
 in the mail-boats at the expense of the Government, losing also a
 summer’s fishery, which in many cases might be avoided by a few days’
 careful attention on board such a ship as the _Albert_. In such cases
 it is not only the men themselves that suffer, but their families are
 often starving throughout the long cold winters that follow. It may
 be a bold suggestion, but perhaps worthy of a little consideration
 (in view of the many harbours and extent of the coast), that were the
 Society to substitute a small steam vessel for the _Albert_, much
 more effective work could be accomplished, as then during the course
 of the summer, at least, three trips instead of one might be made
 along the whole shore; disabled fishermen could be accommodated on
 board for a trip and carried back again without impeding the work of
 the Mission; a representation might also be made to the Newfoundland
 Government—who, according to repute, are at great expense to keep up
 the useless custom of sending a doctor in the mail-boat, and carrying
 home sick men—to do away with their arrangement, and grant a subsidy
 towards the maintenance of a steam vessel, which could do the same
 work far more effectually and, I doubt not, at less expense to them.

 One word more in favour of the support of the Mission on this coast.
 The system of trade, which is largely a credit and barter system,
 deprives the men of the use of cash, even what they have really
 earned; and until settling-up day in the fall, few feel themselves at
 liberty to draw upon their little portion for the necessary comforts
 of their toil; hence the distribution of the woollens, cuffs, etc.,
 comes as a great boon to many a poor fisherman whose hands are cut
 by the lines, or whose clothing, scant at all times, has become
 deplorable by the wear and tear of a seafaring life. The writer has
 seen much of this, and well knows how such gifts would be valued.

 I trust that, as one who has lived and worked upon the coast, and
 who knows by actual experience something of the need of the Labrador
 shore, that I have said enough to evoke the sympathy of all who are
 willing to give one thought to the toilers of the deep, to bestow
 upon your noble Society the means for extending their work in this
 direction. We are far away, but it should be remembered that a large
 quantity of fish is exported to England from Newfoundland; besides, we
 claim kindred, we are, for the most part, of the old British stock,
 and, above all, we are children of the same Heavenly Father who cares
 for all alike.

 May the Almighty bless the work already done, and touch the hearts of
 His children, so that the means may not be wanting when men are ready
 to sacrifice their all to undertake this noble task.

  Yours faithfully,
  JNO. C. SIDEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Far away in that ice-bound, snow-clad country, there are men and women
struggling with poverty, hunger, and disease. Could our kind friends
at home, while sitting around their warm firesides with their dear
children, supplied with every want and comfort, take a peep into the
many miserable hovels, where men, women, and children are ill-fed,
poorly-clad (in some cases nearly naked), suffering from sickness; and
with no prospect of roughing the winter out, as all traders are gone,
their only resource is to apply to the nearest fishing station, perhaps
many miles away, for charity, which, I am thankful to say, is very
rarely refused to them—could our kind friends but get a peep at them,
I feel sure that they would be only too glad to do a little to relieve
their wants. There are many residents scattered far and wide, some in
fairly good circumstances, and there is, without doubt, an immense
field of labour, both spiritually and medically, and I trust that many
friends may be found to assist in this branch....

Hoping that I have been successful in showing you that there is,
indeed, a cry from Labrador: “Come over and help us.”

  JOSEPH F. TREZISE (late Master of _Albert_).

_December 8, 1892._

       *       *       *       *       *

  DEAR DR. GRENFELL,—

 The laudable work in which you are engaged has my warmest sympathy,
 and I trust that your endeavour in so good a cause will meet with the
 success it deserves.

 I visited the Labrador coast many years ago, as far north as Cape
 Harrison, and I then saw the many hardships endured by the hardy
 fishermen and their families. Yours is a most deserving charity.

 Trusting that you will have a large audience when you lecture in the
 city,

  Believe me,
  Yours very truly,
  ROBERT PATON MCLEA,
  Montreal, Canada.

       *       *       *       *       *

 MORAVIAN MISSIONS, SECRETARY’S OFFICE, 7, FURNIVAL’S INN, LONDON, E.C.

  _Nov. 3rd._

  _To_ F. H. WOOD, Esq., _Secretary Deep Sea Mission_.

  DEAR SIR,—

 I am commissioned by the Committee of our Society for the Furtherance
 of the Gospel to convey to your Mission our thanks, and those of our
 missionaries at Hopedale, for the visit of the _Albert_. They write
 very gratefully of the medical aid, and especially of the spiritual
 fellowship and impulse afforded them, and they expressed the hope that
 the visit may be repeated. They say there is no lack of work, and the
 Divine blessing will crown such faithful endeavours to minister to
 the scattered schoonermen and others along the coast.... We beg our
 Society for the Furtherance of the Gospel to express hearty thanks in
 our name, and that of the Eskimos....

  Yours faithfully,
  B. LA TROBE,
  _Secretary_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_From_ Rev. MOSES HARVEY, LL.D., F.R.S., _St. Johns_,

  _July, 1893._

 The great need of hospital work on Labrador is seen when it is
 considered how many cases occur of blindness, deformities, or loss
 of certain faculties, affecting the bread-winners of families, most
 of which might have been prevented if treated in time, and thus much
 personal suffering spared, and also a great loss to the community.
 During the season the medical men were able to render such aid that
 several who had been compelled to give up work found themselves
 capable of resuming their duties. When sick persons are thus saved
 from losing their season’s work, or saved the time and expense
 involved in returning to Newfoundland for advice, in cases of minor
 importance; or when, as happened in several instances during the
 season, the lives or limbs were saved, or, in some hopeless cases,
 life was prolonged so as to allow them to reach home and end their
 days in the bosom of their families, the value of this hospital work
 becomes more apparent.

 To the sick of Labrador these hospitals will be an inestimable boon.
 Only those who have known what it is to toss on a bed of pain, perhaps
 unable even at night to find rest, their tongue parched with thirst,
 and fever raging in their system, can properly appreciate the meaning
 of the skilful help of the physician, the delicate attention of the
 trained nurse, the hushed house, the subdued voices and the gentle
 light of the half-darkened room. When this is contrasted with the sad
 sight so often witnessed on Labrador, of delicate women, and even
 children, undergoing sufferings, which are hard to bear even amid
 the comforts and gentle attentions of home, on the dreary coast of
 Labrador, far from every helping hand, or in the dark hold of some
 small fishing vessel, where the atmosphere is poisonous, and the
 noises to the sick distressing and almost maddening, it is then we
 realize the value of the noble humane work in the hospitals erected on
 storm-beaten Labrador for the relief of suffering humanity. Who would
 not aid in such a good work!


DISTRIBUTION OF CLOTHING.

The _Albert_ brought from England a very large stock of clothing,
both new and cast-off, the gift of kind charitable friends. This was
distributed with the greatest care and discrimination, every precaution
being used to guard against imposition. The cases of utter or partial
destitution of clothing among families who reside permanently on
the Labrador coast, were numerous, and much timely aid was given,
especially to women and children. Food was also given in cases of
extreme destitution. Many families were thus helped to provide for the
long, cold winter of this region. There is no doubt that every spring
some families are driven to subsist on mussels and seaweed they can
gather along the land-wash. With ice on the coast no help can reach
them.


DISTRIBUTION OF BOOKS, PERIODICALS, AND TRACTS.

A very large supply of wholesome literature was carried on board the
Mission ship, and, wherever she went, was freely distributed among the
fishermen. Wherever it was found in any family that any one could read,
a gift was made either of illustrated or plain literature, or both.


RELIGIOUS SERVICES.

Wherever the _Albert_ or _Princess May_ called, when opportunity
offered, especially on Sundays, religious services were held, which
all were invited to attend. Hymns were sung, prayers offered, and
simple addresses given on Scriptural subjects. These services were much
appreciated among these lonely sea-toilers; and thus something was done
to make known that Gospel which has brought such blessings to mankind,
but without any reference to creed or sect being made.

The steam launch, _Princess May_, proved to be of great service in
the Mission work. Dr. Grenfell was enabled to go up uncharted bays
in her, so as to visit a large number of the small settlements which
would otherwise not have been within reach. He was thus able to make
a thorough examination into the condition of the residents, and to
collect accurate statistical information regarding them to an extent
never before attempted. In all, he visited eighty-seven different
settlements on the Labrador coast, as far north as Okkak. Dr. Curwen,
in the _Albert_, visited thirty-five more settlements; and Dr. Bobardt
visited all the places in the vicinity of Battle Harbour.


APPENDIX D

_POVERTY OF THE PEOPLE_


To gauge as accurately as possible the condition of the people, we
prepared as full a census of them—of their belongings, their families,
and their accomplishments—as we could. In this, during three years,
I have had the assistance of four medical men besides myself, of the
resident missionaries on the coast, and of the Moravian brethren
further north.

We find the people, as a rule, very poor, often reduced to the verge
of starvation. The causes we believe to be (1) depletion of fisheries
and fur-bearing animals, and bad seasons. (2) Inability to replenish
traps, guns, nets, boats, etc., when worn out. (3) Inability to secure
proper clothing and supplies of food when once they become overwhelmed
in debt. These causes have led to (4) loss of energy, apathy, and even
despair.

There are some families still comfortably off, but these are
impoverished by their own generosity, which impels them continually
to assist their poorer brethren. Where they are still well off, it is
generally because they have a number of grown-up unmarried sons, or
are in some harbour well separated from other settlers. This last
fact is more patent as one travels north. The census papers are in my
possession now. I will quote here some bad cases.

 Two families here quite destitute. R—— R—— and L—— R——. There
 was neither tea, molasses, nor flour in either house, and their
 clothing was literally dropping to pieces, while one boy was barefoot
 and the others had boots tied on to their feet by string to keep the
 pieces together. If ever hunger wrote its name clearly on people’s
 faces it was written on these people’s, the children being pale and
 bloodless, the woman haggard and careworn. The mother told me, in most
 pathetic way, “Even the berries will be covered deep in snow soon,
 and then we have only starvation to look to.” They had _no flour to
 face the winter_, and apparently no means of obtaining any. Neither
 family had seal nets, salmon nets, or cod nets, or could pay for twine
 to braid any, and both men showed me their powder-horns and shot-bags
 empty, or nearly so. I found on returning to the launch, the captain
 had given his bag of biscuits away to these people.

  W. T. G.

       *       *       *       *       *

 A—— P——. Seven children, very poor and ill-clad; very poor supply
 of food, miserable hut, no nets. The lay reader[22] found three inches
 of snow blow in and remain on the floor of the only room one night
 in winter he slept here. He found one counterpane and a pair of man’s
 trousers almost all the clothing the children had, including the
 eldest, a girl of fourteen. These had to stay indoors, of course, all
 winter.

 [Footnote 22: Mr. Dicks, of Cartwright.]

  W. T. G.

       *       *       *       *       *

 S—— B——. Seven children. Very poor, very naked, short of food, no
 apparatus to kill fish except a few hooks. Miserable one-roomed hut.

  W. T. G.

       *       *       *       *       *

 E—— O——. Wife and two undergrown boys; father has consumption.
 All very badly clothed; not a single flannel garment among them. No
 blankets; bedclothes in rags. One trout net; caught only enough fish
 for their consumption. Nine quintals last year, with which cleared
 part of his debt, and got one barrel of flour and two pounds of tea
 for his “winter diet.” Shot some birds and one seal. Now there is
 nothing but three pounds of broken biscuits in the house.

  ELIOT CURWEN.


APPENDIX E

_THE FISHING SCHOONERS_


I have spoken of these in a general way. Here are a few specimens of
notes from our diaries as to numbers of crews and “freighters” carried.

  B——. 34 tons. Crew, 7 men and 2 women.
            Passengers, 19 men and 16 women.

 A total of 44 souls. All passengers in one hold—no partitions. 23
 days out from home.

  F——. 19 tons. Crew, 6 men and 1 woman.
            Passengers, 28 men and 15 women.

 A total of 50 souls. No name or register on her.

  I——. 50 tons. Crew, 8 men and 2 women.
            Passengers, 75 men and 15 women.

 A total of 100 souls. Measured cubic space of one man, his wife, boy,
 girl, and two men, 8 ft. by 6 ft. by 3 ft.

  X——. _Brigantine_, 116 tons. 66 men, 24 women.

  Y——. Small schooner-rigged vessel, 5 tons.
  4 men, 1 woman, etc.

The larger merchants all send their crews down in steamers. This has
the double advantage of securing better accommodation, and immensely
shortening the passage. We are all strongly of the opinion that nothing
can be said in defence of allowing girls to form part of the regular
crews of the green-fish catchers, or of any fishing vessel. It appears
to be necessary that women should go down as passengers; and with
proper provisions there is no reason why they should not do so.

Here is the result of an accident to such a vessel this year.
Unfortunately I did not ascertain her tonnage.

On Thursday, the 14th inst., we left Spaniard’s Bay, bound to Horse
Harbour, Labrador, on a fishing voyage, having on board a number of
sixty-two souls, comprising men, women, and children. All went well,
until about eight miles north-east of Partridge Point (White Bay). On
the 17th inst., at 4 p.m., Sunday, while in a dense fog, the vessel
struck a large pan of ice, which crushed her bows in, causing her to
fill and sink in about eight or ten minutes. Five or six men succeeded
in getting on the pan of ice with a line, and secured it as best they
could to the pan. Unfortunately it could not be secured on board,
owing to the dreadful panic which was taking place; so she fell off a
considerable distance from the pan, preventing any one from getting on
the ice. A few boats were then thrown over, but before any one could
be taken on board the boats, the vessel sank, leaving men, women and
children floating among the wreckage in the water. Some of the few
boats filled, and were upset, leaving only two to pick up the men,
women and children, who were then struggling for their lives in the
water. After a very hard fight we managed to save fifty (including who
were in the boats), leaving twelve poor souls to meet a watery grave,
namely, eight men, two boys, and two young women. Some of the women
and children were almost totally naked, having jumped out of bed, and
had not time to even catch their clothes. These would have undoubtedly
died before many hours were over, as they were both wet and naked, had
not the schooner _Irene_, Captain Bursey, of Catalina, arrived at this
opportune moment, and quickly got us on board, and brought us into
Coachman’s Cove.

  I am, respectfully yours,
  HENRY GOSSE,
  Late Master of Schooner _Rose_.

SPANIARD’S BAY, _June 28th, 1894_.


Butler & Tanner, The Selwood Printing Works, Frome, and London.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75927 ***
